+++
article_pdf = "https://res.cloudinary.com/dy3wlzuye/image/upload/v1/KingstonChurch/third-person-imperative-greek-new-testament.pdf"
date = ""
title = "The Third Person Imperative in the Greek New Testament"

+++

{{< center >}}
A Thesis Presented to the Faculty of <br>
Abilene Christian University <br>
Abilene, Texas
{{< /center >}}

{{< center >}}
In partial Fulfillment<br>
of the Requirements for the Degree of<br>
Master of Arts
{{< /center >}}

{{< center >}}
by<br>
Schuyler Signor
{{< /center >}}

{{< center >}}
April 1999
{{< /center >}}

## Abstract

The third person imperative in the Greek New Testament is generally discussed with the second person imperative without distinction. The English language has no form corresponding to the third person imperative, and therefore must employ an adequate substitute to communicate the same meaning and force of the original text. Thus, it is incumbent upon the exegete to discover how the third person imperative functions grammatically and contextually as a distinct form.

I examined every occurrence of the third person imperative in the Greek New Testament in conjunction with the Septuagint and selected sections from first century writers Philo and Josephus. I hypothesized that unless third and second person imperatives functioned differently, at least in some instances, the presence of both forms would be superfluous. Thus, each occurrence was examined with regard to syntax, semantics, and pragmatics.

The study demonstrated that the third person does function differently from the second person imperative other than in the expected sense of addressing a third party beyond the immediate listening/reading audience. In actuality, its capacity for this purpose is infrequently employed and easily provided for by other forms. The primary function of the third person imperative is to add emphasis for the immediate audience either with regard to _who_ (in the audience) is responsible to carry out the injunction (what I have called “subject transfers”) or _what_ is to be done by the audience (what I have called “object transfers”).

I also considered how the speakers/writers chose the (present and aorist) “tense” forms used with the third person imperative. I found nothing distinctive about this process in contrast to the second person. However, I did find the traditional view lacking that asserts a direct correspondence between the speakers’/writers’ choice of these two forms and the existence or the non-existence of the action in reality. Finally, I applied the results of this study to the question of translating the third person imperative into English.

## Questions and Issues

The primary purpose of translating is to communicate the meaning of a given text or verbal expression of a source language into a text or verbal expression of a receptor language. There are two essential elements in every language: form (whether oral or written) which includes the phonological, grammatical, and lexical systems of the language, and meaning which is the message the form communicates.[^1]

There are two fundamental problems in communicating the meaning of the source language into the receptor language. The first is the lack of strict correspondence between the elements of form and meaning in both languages, which is sometimes called “skewing.”[^2] Factors that influence skewing include the multifarious nature of the lexical and grammatical features (including idiomatic and figurative language),[^3] authorial intent (which may or may not be fully expressed in the form the author has chosen),[^4] and context (which shapes authorial intent and choice of form). This last factor covers all cultural and immediate precipitating influences on the language of the text; that is, it includes all extralinguistic or non-semantic elements. Thus, the meaning of a text is determined by analysis in two categories: semantics (the language of the text itself) and pragmatics (the extralinguistic factors, including authorial intent and context). These two categories must be distinguished, but not separated.[^5]

Skewing can be demonstrated by the three moods in English with an imperatival sense: The future indicative form, “You will do your homework,” the subjunctive, “I insist that you finish your homework,” or “If I were you, I would finish the homework,” and the imperative itself, “Do your homework.” On the other hand, imperative forms can have a variety of meanings in addition to command: “Be happy your homework is finished” is hortative (being happy is not subject to control), “Finish your homework and you’ll be happy” is conditional, “All right then, don’t finish your homework” is ironic (the statement is contrary to the intent of the speaker, it might signal resignation or possibly a threat), “Help me, I’m drowning” is an entreaty (the speaker is in a compromising or submissive position), etc.[6] Each of these examples makes it clear that the form with which an author chooses to convey his or her meaning is dictated by extralinguistic conventions.[7] Forms, removed from their contexts, could assume other meanings.

The second problem communicating the meaning of the source language into the receptor language is a lack of formal correspondence between the two languages. Often there is formal correspondence; that is, the receptor language has a corresponding form. It does not follow, however, that the receptor language most effectively communicates the meaning of the source language by using corresponding forms. Generally, an idiomatic translation (i.e., using the most natural form of the receptor language, whether it corresponds or not) is preferred to a literal translation (i.e., using primarily the corresponding form of the receptor language). This is not to suggest that the source language forms are unimportant in translating. Those forms were natural to, and provided meaningful discourse for, the original audience. Therefore, the translator must capture the meaning and dynamics of the original forms to represent them faithfully in the receptor language.8 Nida and Taber suggest the following system of priorities in any specific instance of translating: contextual over verbal consistency, dynamic equivalence (“idiomatic”) over formal correspondence, aural over written form, and forms (in the receptor language) best suited for the audience over more prestigious forms.[9]

This problem becomes acute in the case of the Greek third person imperative, for which there is no formal equivalent in English. In the first place, English is a word order and time-based language; Koine Greek is a non-temporal inflectional language. Therefore, meaning is even less influenced by form in English than it is in Greek. In the second place, there is no general agreement on mood theory in English. This is particularly true with regard to the imperative and subjunctive which are often identical in form.[10] Mood should reflect the attitude the speaker/writer has toward the content of his or her expression, yet in both Greek and English this is not always possible to detect.

These problems contribute to ambiguity in some passages. For example, is 1 Cor 11:34 (ejn oi¡kwø ejsqie/tw) merely hortative as might be inferred from the NASB (“let him eat at home”), modestly obligatory as in the NIV (“he should eat at home”), or unconditionally obligatory as in the NEB (“eat at home”)? It is possible that each translation intends the same force and assumes that the reader can understand this from the context, but the forms chosen do not communicate this decisively. The evidence demonstrates that the overall choice of forms used by each translation is more precise than would allow for the kind of ambiguity existing among the translations. In other words, the field of choices available to, and used in, each English translation allows for enough flexibility to communicate with precision the degree of intensity intended in the third person imperative (see below under “The Question of Mood” and Chapter V). Therefore, the varying intensities implied in the above examples could be understood as intended by the translators. Accordingly, the NEB allows no option—he must eat at home. The NASB and NIV do not seem to make it as binding. This might be an example where one or more of these translations is distorting the force of the passage.

The purpose of this thesis is to examine the third person imperative in the Greek New Testament with regard to the two problems identified above: first, how the imperative mood, and the tenses in that mood, function,11 and second, determining what English forms best communicate the meaning.

### The Question of Mood

The English language has three moods: indicative, subjunctive, and (second person) imperative.[12] Each mood is capable of carrying an imperatival force. The NIV New Testament, for example, uses each of these moods in various grammatical structures to translate the Greek third person imperative: the third person subjunctive (ca. 70 percent),[13] the third person indicative (ca. 20 percent),14 and the second person imperative (ca. 10 percent).15 However, the various levels of imperatival intensity (see next paragraph) of the imperative mood in Greek are not always reflected by these English structures.

The Greek third person imperative form is inherently neutral with regard to its level of intensity, which must be determined by context. I have accordingly identified three such levels: obligatory (84 percent), hortative (13 percent), and optative (3 percent).16 In contrast to the Greek imperative, the English grammatical structures chosen to translate it, as well as the context, contribute to the level of intensity.

The example cited above (1 Cor 11:34) illustrates this point. The Greek phrase ejn oi¡kwø ejsqie/tw, as it stands alone, reveals little as to the intensity of the writer’s mood. In English translation however, the phrases “let him eat at home,” “he should eat at home,” “he must eat at home,” “eat at home,” “he will eat at home,” etc., standing apart from the context and in comparison to one another, suggest a range of intensity (from hortative to obligatory). Therefore, the varying functions of the imperative mood in Greek can be reflected by all three moods in English; however, the specific grammatical structures themselves (unlike the Greek forms) also contribute to the function of the mood selected and influence the meaning of the text.

The NIV New Testament is uneven in the forms it chooses and the levels of intensity communicated. For example, it appropriately uses the modal auxiliary “let” in subjunctives for most hortative imperatives (Matt 24:15 - 18; John 7:37; 1 Cor 7:15). However, it frequently (in ca. 25 percent of the occurrences) translates obligatory imperatives with the same form (Matt 5:37; Mark 10:9; 1 Cor 1:31; 14:37; Col 3:15 - 16). As there are a number of adequate English forms to communicate the different levels of intensity of the Greek imperative mood, there is no reason to choose those which may mollify the force of the passage.[17]

## The Question of Tense

The question of tense is far more complex than that of mood. It is generally agreed that the temporal sense of the imperative—in every language—is future. Bolinger states this point clearly: “Possibility of compliance and futurity are fundamentally a single criterion. The present and the past cannot be acted upon. The future can.”[18] The forms chosen in English to translate the third person imperative, with rare exceptions,[19] reflect this idea.

This sense of futurity, however, is not a function of “tense,” the category often used to discuss the time of an action; it is a function of the imperatival mood.[20] Mood signals the factuality (indicative mood) or non-factuality (non-indicative moods) of the action. Actually, mood expresses the way the speaker or writer perceives the action, not necessarily the objective reality of it. Thus, mood is subjective, not objective. The imperative orders, encourages, or in some way wills action not perceived as factual at the time of the utterance or writing. Dana and Mantey call it “the mood of volition. It is the genius of the imperative to express the appeal of will to will...It expresses neither probability nor possibility, but only intention, and is, therefore, the farthest removed from reality.”[21] However, “the imperative demands realization” in varying degrees of intensity.[22] Thus, the action is realized in the “future,” if at all—it can be rejected (Mark 10:21 - 22) or impossible to obey (John 4:16 - 18). This does not mean that the imperative is essentially a future tense; as with the other non-indicative moods, the imperative is non-temporal.23

This raises a question as to the function of the present and aorist tenses used with the third person imperative in the Greek New Testament.24 If the imperative is non-temporal in nature, what is the role of the aorist and present tenses in that mood? This is the question around which most of the discussion on the imperative has revolved. However, before I summarize the status of the scholarship on this specific question (see “Critical Issues” below), it will be helpful to look briefly at the general question about the nature of “tense.”

The traditional view believes tense in the indicative mood expresses both time, relative to the utterance (past, present, or future), and the kind of action involved (in progress, completed, or indefinite). In the non-indicative moods only the kind of action is expressed.[25] Yet grammarians recognize that “since the pres. ind. occurs for past, present and future time it is clear that ‘time’ is secondary even in the ind.”[26] It is not morphology alone, but primarily context that determines the time element.[27] Based on these and other considerations, Stanley Porter argues that the only thing indicated by morphology (including the indicative forms) is “aspect,” which refers to, but is not, the kind of action.[28]

“Aspect” (a term first used by classical scholars) is essentially the way the writer or speaker views the action in its context; it is “the author’s reasoned subjective choice of conception of a process.”[29] The term common among New Testament scholars that refers to the kind of action in its objective reality is “Aktionsart.” Three kinds of action have been traditionally identified: punctiliar (momentary) presented by the aorist stem, durative (linear) presented by the present stem, and perfected (completed) presented by the perfect stem.30 Some scholars deny, however, that action in objective reality can be determined morphologically, and argue that aspect alone is what the verb stem provides. The writer or speaker views the verbal idea in one of three ways: imperfective (in process) presented by the present and imperfect tenses, perfective (as a whole) presented by the aorist tense, and stative (as a state arising from an action) presented by the perfect and pluperfect tenses. McKay adds what he calls an “anomalous” aspect, the future—action viewed as an intention or expectation.[31]

Morphologically-based aspectual theories are not without their critics,[32] but the nuances of the debate are well beyond the scope of this discussion.[33] However, with particular reference to the present and aorist tenses, the results of aspectual research may help better explain the function of these two tenses with the imperative. If the aspectual approach is valid, the aorist (perfective aspect) imperative may do no more than focus on the action simply as a whole (a single event),[34] while the present (imperfective aspect) imperative focuses on the event in progress (thus suggesting repetition, habit, etc.).[35] The more traditional categories of tense, durative (continuing) for the present and punctiliar (momentary) for the aorist, do not accurately reflect the contexts in which they are found.[36] In fact, there is no direct correlation between the present and aorist tenses and the objective action that is referred to by these categories:

> One of the most striking characteristics of the aspect in Ancient Greek is that it is essentially subjective: one uses the present-stem because one is concerned with the duration of the action; inversely, the aorist-stem expresses primarily not what is necessarily in itself devoid of duration, but whose duration does not count to the mind of the speaker.[37]

As early as 1895, with particular reference to the imperative in Attic writers, J. Donovan observed that the aorist and present tenses were used interchangeably with regard to the kind of action they were depicting. For example, “the present is used just as freely as the aorist of actions...momentary, momentary and single, single occurrences, single or transient.”[38] Similarly, from a study of the dramatic or dynamic uses of the imperative, L. A. Post found “the present may for most verbs replace the aorist for dramatic reasons.”[39] This idea is particularly important for exegesis and translation, which I hope to make clearer as I consider individual passages in contrast to traditional views of the distinctive functions of the two tenses in the third person imperative (see below under “Critical Issues” and Chapter IV).[40]

### Critical Issues

In his brief article in 1978, Ray Elliott raised some questions concerning the function of the third person imperative in the Greek New Testament.41 To the best of my knowledge, there has been no extended discussion distinguishing the second and third person imperatives in the New Testament.[42] The consensus among scholars, who have made specific reference to the third person, is that it essentially functions the same as the second person.[43] Generally, they are treated together.

The only major exception is with aorist prohibitions. In the New Testament, second person negative commands are always in the subjunctive mood; third person negative commands retain the imperative.[44] Turner claims “the prohibitive aor. imperative is later than the NT: Horn quotes the first as iii/A.D.”[45] Notwithstanding this apparent anomaly, the consensus suggests—either through silence, as with Turner, or direct comment—“there seems to be no distinguishable difference in meaning” between second person subjunctive and third person imperative prohibitions.[46] Moulton merely passes over the distinction: “Not much need be added as to the use of the 3rd [person imperative]. Here the veto on the aorist in prohibition is withdrawn: we need not stay to ask why.”[47]

There have been attempts to explain the use of both the subjunctive and imperative forms in the imperative. For example, M. W. Humphreys suggests politeness may have been an issue in the classical period. The subjunctive mood was used in second person negative commands to mollify their offensive nature. However, as third person commands were often in reference to absent individuals, speakers were therefore less considerate and might use the imperative. As the language developed, the reason for the distinction was lost sight of and the forms were used indiscriminately (i.e., in the third person).48 This psychological explanation does not address the problem of the aorist third person imperative employed when the referenced individual is not absent. If politeness were a concern, a prohibition stated in this context could be regarded as even less polite than if the individual were addressed directly with a second person imperative; at least the latter acknowledges the person’s presence.49

C. W. E. Miller finds Humphreys’ suggestion untenable. Miller argues that to the Greek (and indeed to our own) mind there was no inherent difference of intensity in negative (prohibitions) and positive commands. The distinction (degree of harshness or politeness) is always determined by context—the spirit and position of the persons giving and receiving the command, as well as the nature of the command itself.50 Miller explains the use of the aorist subjunctive in prohibitions on historical (rather than psychological) grounds—the negated subjunctive developed from the negated injunctive (which were formally identical), and asserts that the aorist subjunctive is “milder” due to the simple fact that it is a subjunctive construction and longer in form than most imperatives. However, the degree of harshness cannot be determined in any given form itself.[51]

Regardless of how this difference between second and third person aorist prohibitions evolved, there is general agreement that formal mood change did not effectively alter meaning, at least by the first century AD. [52] According to Porter, “In most contexts, translations of negated imperatives and negated subjunctives used as prohibitions can be virtually identical.”[53] As the language developed, it also appears that person number did not affect the meaning; a third person command is as strong as a second person command, whether positive or negative.[54] These facts are problematic for translation into English where mood and person do affect the meaning: “The jussive, namely, a third person imperative, ‘let him suffer’ (not permission but command), is highly ambiguous in English.”[55] Thus, one task for the translator is transferring the mood and person of the Greek third person imperative into an English idiom that does not diminish its force or emphasis.

The second difficulty lies more within the Greek itself and centers on the tenses, primarily the aorist and present for the third person imperative. For example, the only difference between the aorist subjunctive and present imperative “is the conception of the action as respects its progress,”[56] which is considered a function of “tense.” It is generally agreed that neither tense nor aspectual usage is affected by change of mood[57] or person.58 Therefore, one of the major issues that has evolved concerning the imperative is the aspectual nature of commands as it relates to the present and aorist forms. It raises two basic questions. First, what is the difference in the nature of the action called for by the aorist and present imperatives? Second, and inseparably related to the first, how is the nature of the action to be determined? The debate can be narrowed down to basically two approaches: That which stresses grammatical rules (while recognizing “exceptions”), and that which stresses context (while recognizing patterns). This distinction is subtle, but becomes more obvious during the exegesis of specific passages. Those who follow the former approach frequently employ “rules” which allow them to go beyond the data provided by the text in arriving at an interpretation. In some cases these interpretations are problematic and illogical.[59]

The origin of this debate is a series of articles in The Classical Review (1903 - 1906). W. Headlam,[60] followed by Henry Jackson,[61] took the position that mh\ plus the present imperative meant “stop,” while mh\ plus the aorist subjunctive meant “don’t start.” In response, H. Darnley Naylor[62] and R. C. Seaton63 found sufficient examples to disprove Headlam’s “canon.” Headlam responded to Naylor’s exceptions by asking, “Might they not almost be looked upon as those exceptions which, according to the proverb, prove the rule?”64 Moulton endorsed Headlam’s canon noting the obvious exceptions, but was forced to strained interpretations in some cases.[65] Turner backed off the canon to some degree (using terms like “more or less ... somewhat ... tend”), and recognized that Moulton may have been “a little over confident in the rules of Aktionsart.” 66 However, Turner later seemed to apply the canon confidently.[67]

Goetchius provides the best summary of the “rules” traditionally recognized for the present and aorist imperatives, although he adds a caveat that the distinctions cannot always be pressed:

> The difference in meaning between the present imperative and the aorist imperative is not one of time, but of aspect. The present imperative is progressive or durative, referring to an action already in progress, while the aorist is indefinite or “ingressive,” referring, usually, to an action which is to be commenced...The negatives used with the imperative mood are mh/ and its compounds; the translation of these negative commands or prohibitions parallels that of positive commands: the present imperative is thus used in a prohibition in which someone is commanded to stop doing what he is doing, whereas the aorist imperative is used in prohibitions in which someone is commanded not to start doing something.[68]

Other aspectual characteristics can be added. For example:

> [the aorist] denotes action that is either transient and instantaneous..., or to be undertaken but once,...[the present] denotes an action already begun and to be continued..., or one that is permanent and frequently recurring. Hence [the present] is commonly employed in the measured and dispassionate language of laws and moral precepts,...[it] conveys more softness and reserve of expression, and frequently denotes merely advice.[69]

Other Greek scholars are more cautious in formulating rules for the imperative. Smyth argues that mh/ with the present imperative is ambiguous and could involve either a command to cease an action in process or to abstain from an action yet in the future. Likewise, mh/with the aorist subjunctive can mean either.[70]

One of the strongest statements against the formulation of “rules” for the imperative—particularly those for prohibitions—is by James L. Boyer; he calls the concept “inadequate and misleading ... [a] fallacy.”[71] According to his analysis of the 174 present imperatives with mh/ in the New Testament, only 38 explicitly indicate previous action in the context, which would permit the translation of “stop doing something,” four uses indicate the action has already stopped, 100 are general exhortations which at best are ambiguous—in some cases “stop” would make little sense, and 32 uses specifically deny previous action.[72] The characterizations of the aorist imperative as “urgent,” more “pressing ... rude ... ruthless” than the present (see Winer quote above)[73] is also criticized on the basis of the fact that the aorist tense—by definition—was non-special (“unbounded”). In addition, such characterizations are not always supported by the contexts in which the aorist imperatives are found.[74]

### Categorizing Imperatives

New Testament imperatives can be divided into two broad categories. First, generic imperatives are not occasion-specific and can be said to apply universally (e.g., Rom 6:12; 1 Cor 16:14). This does not mean that generic imperatives cannot be used in occasion-specific contexts (e.g., 1 Cor 14:40). Second, specific imperatives are occasion specific and apply only in limited contexts (e.g., Matt 9:30; 24:16 - 17).[75] This broad breakdown is not as precise as might be desired; it is often difficult to determine whether or not an imperative is occasion-specific with limited application (e.g., 1 Cor 14:34; 1 Tim 2:11).[76]

In addition, imperatives have been categorized by type. The standard grammars and studies generally recognize about six types.[77] Most are second person (85 percent). First, commands (71 percent) and prohibitions (negative commands) (11 percent) constitute the largest group. Requests (entreaties) and prayers make up the second largest group (11 percent). Next are imperatives of permission (2 percent). Fourth are conditional (“concessive”) imperatives (“Do something and this will follow,” e.g., John 2:19) (1 percent). Fifth, greetings using the imperative form of cai/rw occur seven times. A final group of imperatives might best be called interjections which are generally exclamatory words of introduction (e.g., ajkou/ete, a¡ge, ble/pete). These last two types do not occur in the third person. Thus, for the sake of this discussion four types of imperatives will be considered: command (positive and negative), entreaty (request and prayer), permission, and condition.

More specifically, Judy Glaze categorized the third person imperative in the Septuagint. She found that the third person imperative is most often used to address the second or even the first person, leading her to question the distinction between the second and third person forms and whether they were interchangeable or characterized by precise usage.[78] In a large percentage of occurrences the third person did not even function as an imperative. She arrived at two general categories relevant to this study. First, there were, in a minority of cases, true third person imperatives either with or without an intermediary (real or implied).[79] Second, there were third person acting as second person imperatives. They served four distinct functions: etiquette, intensification of a command, emphasis of sentence elements, and alteration of tone (see particularly my Chapters II and III).

These functions occurred on three levels of imperatival intensity: direct imperative, subjunctive, and optative. On the direct imperative level there are five general uses: structural/ address/subset transformation, idioms, permission, decrees, and dares. On the subjunctive level both imperatives and subjunctives are used without distinction. The third person imperative functions as a hortatory subjunctive in covenant agreements and as a second person subjunctive addressing royalty, higher social rank, and God. On the optative level it functions primarily in curses and blessings, as well as causation (in prayer) and wishes.[80]

Glaze found “discernible usage patterns” with regard to the present and aorist tenses. The aorist was heavily favored in addresses to kings and God, and in blessings and curses. The present was favored in decrees and pronouncements of punishment.[81] Others patterns may be identified,[82] but do not offer much to the discussion as I see it. This is true for two reasons. First, it is difficult to define what percentage of frequency qualifies as a “pattern.” Second, the statistics are partly subjective, depending on the
interpreter’s understanding of the passage.

Two broad pattern groupings are insightful and deserve mention, but need not be concentrated on here. First, it is often noted that the present is preferred in maxims (what I called “generic imperatives”) (mh\ kle/pte, don’t be a thief), and the aorist in specific situations (“specific imperatives”) (mh\ kle/yhøß, don’t steal this or that).[83] Second, L. A. Post’s study of Attic dramatists led him to classify three situational groups: facts in control favored the present, speaker (assumed) in control also favored the present, and hearer (called to action by the speaker in a tone of intimacy or friendship) in control (in the sense that he or she has the decision making power) favored the aorist.[84]

### Translating the Third Person Imperative

Pursuant to the preceding, the issues underlying the purpose of this thesis—how the imperative mood, as well as the tenses in that mood, function in the Greek New Testament, and determining the best English forms to communicate the meaning—can be further defined. The task of the translator is transferring the mood and person of the third person imperative into English forms without diminishing its force. A critical matter is how far grammatical “rules” can be stressed in determining the function of the present and aorist tense forms. Can the translator (interpreter) go beyond the data of the context? Is it legitimate to characterize either tense as to urgency, tone, etc.? How significant are the categories that imperatives appear to fall into? Are there discernible patterns that
should be used to influence one’s interpretation of ambiguous passages? In short, can the modern reader learn more about the historical background of the text (Sitz im Leben, authorial intent, etc.) through grammatical rules, characterizations, patterns, etc.?

### Presuppositions and Method

The study of language can be broken down into three categories expressing relationships of the linguistic symbols (i.e., words, phrases, clauses and other structural elements): syntax, semantics, and pragmatics.[85] Syntax analyzes the relationship of the symbols to one another in a given structural unit. This is particularly important in New Testament Greek because it is an inflected language. Words of the same class (e.g., nouns, pronouns, adjectives, participles) share formal elements (endings) differentiating case, number, and gender which help define a word’s role in a sentence.[86] Therefore, word order can be utilized for emphasis or highlighting various discourse information.[87]

Semantics analyzes the meanings conveyed by particular forms (cases, tenses, verbal aspect, prepositions, etc.)[88] of the symbols (individual words and expressions) and the meaningful structure of the discourse. It concentrates on the language itself expressed
in the lexical (“dictionary”) meanings of the symbols,[89] and more recently, in the “semantic domains” of the symbols.[90]

Pragmatics deals with the language symbols of the text in relationship to extralinguistic (non-semantic) factors, especially authorial intent expressed within its own peculiar social and historical context. It is concerned with what a particular form means in a given context. Inasmuch as authorial intent ultimately defines the meaning of the text, the structure and the symbols chosen to express that meaning (syntax and semantics) should not be analyzed apart from pragmatics.[91]

It is a presupposition of this thesis that context, rather than a mechanical system of rules (even with “exceptions”) or inductively acquired statistics, governs the meaning of any discourse expression (from a single word to the entire discourse).[92] Unless a “rule” or statistic is supported by all the incontrovertible evidence (which, with rare exceptions, is not the case), the interpreter should not feel the liberty to apply the rule or statistic to ambiguous or neutral cases, which are many.93 Such practices have often led to strained, if not fallacious, interpretations.94 The circles of context range from the individual words chosen by the speaker and/or writer, the clauses and sentences he forms with them, the paragraphs, the chapters, the entire literary work, and even the collection of works by the author, to all the external factors (“pragmatics”) affecting the final expression. This last circle of context becomes particularly acute in the case of imperatives because even the tone of voice and the body language of the speaker (and possibly other people in his immediate environment) help shape the meaning of his words. Because this is impossible for modern readers to know with certainty, there is frequently an element of ambiguity with imperatives.[95]

According to these three categories, I have inductively examined the third person imperative in the New Testament, with regular reference to the Septuagint, Philo, and Josephus. I have included the first two categories under “Syntactic and Semantic Categories” in Chapter II, and the third (pragmatics) under “Pragmatic Categories” in Chapter III.[96] Chapter IV addresses the function of the present and aorist verb forms in light of each category. The final chapter attempts to draw all this together to find the best English forms to communicate the author’s intentions. As each category inherently involves the other, there is overlapping between chapters, however, the distinctions remain.

## Syntactic and Semantic Categories of the Third Person Imperative

There are 234 occurrences of the third person imperative in the Greek New Testament.[97] Although far less frequent than the second person imperative, it is highly visible, occurring approximately once in every thirty-four verses.[98] The highest concentration is found in James (once in every 7.2 verses), while the lowest is found in Hebrews (once in every 151 verses, only two occurrences).[99] Both the Pauline and Petrine material demonstrate above average usage (once in every 20 and 15 verses respectively).[100]

It is difficult to draw a significant conclusion from these observations, other than that which is already obvious: the third person imperative, like the second person, generally occurs in paraenetic contexts, whether in verbal discourse (as in the Gospels, Acts, and Revelation) or epistolary form.101 In this sense, the third person imperative exhibits the same general characteristics as the second person imperative and other imperatival forms that define paraenesis. Reinforcing this is the employment of the third person imperative as a substitute for other imperatival forms in an immediate context,[102] parallel passages,[103] Septuagint quotations,[104] and textual variants.[105] Therefore, it is evident that the third person imperative can have at least the same imperatival force as other forms. However, as I intend to demonstrate in what follows, the third person often adds an element of emphasis that serves to intensify or focus the imperative for certain individuals.

There have been few attempts to classify third person apart from second person imperatives. However, a careful examination of the third person imperative suggests much can be added as to its use in contrast with the second person imperative.

James Boyer’s classifications of the third person are sometimes questionable. For example, in the commands addressed to the immediate audience (Indirect Command to “You”) he includes those that refer to “some part of you” (Matt 5:16; 6:10) as the “simplest and most obvious.”106 However, he offers no explanation for this usage or why it is so “obvious,” and he fails to make a distinction between the potential parties so addressed.[107] In some cases, his classifications are incorrect. For example, under “What is Required of a Third Party” he includes Matt 18:17.[108] However, it is clear from the context that the responsible party is the listening audience; they are being commanded to treat the third party—the subject of the imperative—in a particular way; the third party is not being commanded to do anything. In fact, the subject of this third person command becomes the direct object of the action inherent in the command (see below under Conditional Constructs and Chapter III).

Judy Glaze’s study, on the other hand, is far more helpful. However, there are some significant differences between the use of the third person imperative in the Septuagint and the New Testament. For example, nearly one-third of the occurrences in the Septuagint are in poetic material, whereas the same is essentially nonexistent in the New Testament. At the same time, conditional constructs with a third person imperative in the apodosis comprise nearly one-quarter (54) of the occurrences in the New Testament,109 but are uncommon in the Septuagint.[110] This high frequency of conditional constructs induced me to analyze the third person imperative syntactically and semantically before attempting to consider it pragmatically.

I have identified three general classifications of the third person imperative with respect to its relationship to the other elements in its structural unit: emphatic subject transfer, emphatic object transfer, and conditional construct.[111]

### Emphatic Subject Transfer

Nearly one-half (114) of the third person imperatives in the New Testament are in this classification. In this class, the subject of the imperative is the result of a “transfer” of a subject generally from an implied (or actual) second person imperative,[112] or other imperatival form, 113 in the same context. [114] The third person allows the writer/speaker to shift the focus to certain individuals in the audience,[115] or extend it beyond the audience. In this sense, the third person (singular or plural) imperative is more effective and emphatic than the second person (plural) imperative, which tends to mollify its own force to each individual in the audience.[116] The subject of the third person imperative is the party responsible to fulfill or respond to the demands (or hortative exhortations/warnings) of the imperative, and is either in the immediate audience or the “implied” audience.[117]

There are two basic grammatical constructions used to make a subject transfer. The first is the determinate nominative construct, under which 75 third person imperatives are classified. In this case, the subject of the imperative is defined in the immediate context by an articular nominative form which is generally a participle, but may also be an adjective, a noun, or an elided form (usually with an independent definite article).[118] In a few cases the subject is defined by an anarthrous nominative form, yet it is still determined as a specifically named subject among the listeners/readers.[119] This type of construction tends to narrow or limit —thus, it is determinate—the focus of the imperatives to each individual or groups within the audiences.

Luke 22 has examples of an adjective and participles used by Jesus at his last Passover meal: oJ mei/zwn ejn uJmivn gine/sqw wJß oJ new/teroß ... oJ e¡cwn balla/ntion ajra/tw, oJmoi/wß kai\ th/ran, kai\ oJ mh\ e¡cwn pwlhsa/tw to\ iJma/tion aujtouv kai\ ajgorasa/tw ma/cairan (vv. 26, 36).120 It is clear Jesus is addressing his apostles; he could have as well used second person imperatives. However, the singular third person imperatives in conjunction with the determinate nominatives force each apostle to examine himself. In the case of this audience, it is likely the first imperative (v. 26) would apply to each of them,[121] while the remaining imperatives (v. 36) would conceivably apply to only some of them.[122]

In Matt 24 Jesus predicts a catastrophic event privately (kat j ijdi/an) to his disciples (vv. 3 - 4).123 Matthew directly draws every reader into the discussion with an emphatic subject transfer: oJ ajnaginw/skwn noei/tw (v. 15).124 Immediately following are three third person imperatives with the subjects defined by elided determinative nominatives: oiJ ejn thvø jIoudai/aø feuge/twsan ... oJ ejpi\ touv dw/matoß mh\ kataba/tw ... oJ ejn twøv ajgrwøv mh\ ejpistreya/tw (vv. 16 - 18).125

Occasionally a simple noun form is used to determine the subject of the imperative.[126] For example, in 1 Corinthians 7 Paul is addressing a number of marital problems. In v. 3 he commands, thvø gunaiki\ oJ ajnh\r th\n ojfeilh\n (“marital duty,” NIV) ajpodido/tw, oJmoi/wß de\ kai\ hJ gunh\ twvø ajndri/. In this way, Paul narrows the command to each husband and wife in the Corinthian church. A plural can also be used when singling out particular groups (1 Cor 14:34).[127]

Infrequently, the reference is to a specific individual.128 In 2 Cor 10:11 Paul uses the determinate adjective oJ toiouvtoß as the subject of logize/sqw. The immediate antecedent is fhsi/n (v. 10), which likely reaches back to tiß in v. 7. The singular may refer to all those of the opposition “personalized as a single number” or an individual viewed as “the ringleader of the opposition.[”129]

On rare occasions, the subject of the imperative is difficult to identify grammatically. The final two third person imperatives in 1 Cor 7 (v. 36) are in a rather complex conditional construct. The sentence begins with a protasis of a first class condition (eij de/ tiß ajschmoneivn ejpi\ th\n parqe/non aujtouv nomi/zei), followed by a protasis of a third class condition (eja\n h∞ø uJpe/rakmoß; the subject is taken from the indirect object of the preceding protasis). The apodosis of the third class condition (kai\ ou¢twß ojfei/lei gi/nesqai, acting as a future indicative anticipating the action to be taken in gamei/twsan) immediately follows, preceding the apodosis of the first class condition (o§ qe/lei poiei/tw). It appears that the marriage of the two parties is being discussed.[130] Thus, Paul adds gamei/twsan, which might be the apodosis of an implied or elliptical condition (eij qe/lousin gameivn).[131] Although this awkward structure is problematic, the imperative gamei/twsan is an emphatic subject transfer determined from the indefinite nominative tiß (with qe/lei) and the implied nominative in hø∞(from
th\n parqe/non).

The idiomatic expression oJ e¡cwn w∞ta ajkoue/tw occurs, in various forms, 15 times in the New Testament.132 Ezekiel 3:27 (oJ ajkou/wn ajkoue/tw, kai\ oJ ajpeiqwvn ajpeiqei/tw) might serve as a background for Jesus’ words. In Ezekiel, “hearing” is set in opposition to “disobeying.” Thus, “hear” means “obey.” The third person imperatives are affirmations of the preceding present participles addressed to Ezekiel suggesting that the coming judgment is imminent and nothing will change those who are now hearing (obeying) or disobeying; thus, the imperatives have only a hortative force for Ezekiel.

As typical in the Old Testament, the Ezekiel passage uses the word ajkou/w in a context of the revelation of God’s Word (cf. Deut 4:1, 10; 32:1 - 2; Isa 50:10; Mic 6:1). Hearing is a prevalent feature of biblical faith. To hear is to receive by faith the Word of God and to obey its demands. Not to hear is to reject the Word and its call to repentance (Jer 7:13; Hos 9:17).[133] Unlike the words spoken to Ezekiel, Jesus’ utterances are obligatory upon the listeners. In each context he is calling for acceptance of and obedience to the revealed Word of God. Similarly, in the New Testament, many uses of the second person imperative[134] and other forms of ajkou/w carry the same force demanding obedience.[135]

The second basic grammatical construction used to make a subject transfer is the indeterminate nominative construct, under which 39 third person imperatives are classified. In this case, the subject of the imperative is defined in the immediate context by an indeterminate nominative form.136 Three adjectives (e¢kastoß, pavß, and its negated antonym mhdei/ß),[137] the indefinite pronoun (tiß), the relative pronoun (o¢ß), and the anarthrous generic noun a¡nqrwpoß are each used substantively.138 Such nominatives tend to extend the focus of the imperative beyond the audience as a whole to everyone, and thus, concomitantly, narrowing the focus to everyone in the audience. In some cases (with e¢kastoß and tiß) this effect is intensified and individualized for the audience when a substantive is conjoined with a partitive genitive (uJmwvn, hJmwvn) or is contiguous with a dative of location (ejn uJmivn).[139]

The effect of this construction is to universalize the command, and force each individual in the listening/reading audience to have a sense of personal responsibility to the injunction. Thus, “every person must be subject to superior authorities” (Pavsa yuch\ ejxousi/aiß uJperecou/saiß uJpotasse/sqw, Rom 13:1);140 “because of acts of fornication, each man must have his own woman, each woman must have her own man” (dia\ de\ ta\ß pornei/aß e¢kastoß th\n eJautouv gunaivka ejce/tw kai\ eJka/sth to\n i¡dion a¡dra ejce/tw, 1 Cor 7:2);141 “[each] person must examine himself and so eat of the bread and drink of the cup” (dokimaze/tw de\ a¡nqrwpoß eJauto/n kai\ ou¢twß ejk touv a¡rtou ejsqie/tw kai\ ejk touv pothri/ou pine/tw, 1 Cor 11:28);142 “for not anyone of you is to suffer as a murderer ...” (mh\ ga/r tiß uJmwvn pasce/tw wJß foneu\ß ktl, 1 Pet 4:15);[143] and “whoever divorces his wife, must give her a certificate of divorce” ( §Oß a=n ajpolu/shø th\n gunaivka aujtouv, do/tw aujthvø ajposta/sion, Matt 5:31 with Deut 24:1).[144]

The relative constructions in Mark 4:9 ( §Oß e¡cei w∞ta ajkou/ein ajkoue/tw) and Luke 17:31a (o§ß e¡stai ejpi\ touv dw/matoß ... mh\ kataba/tw) demonstrate the close relationship between the various nominative forms of subject transfers. Mark uses the relative form of an idiom that is also framed with an articular participle (Matt 11:15; Luke 8:8; Rev 2:7; etc.) and as a conditional construct (Mark 2:23; Rev 13:9). Luke, in the same verse, has a similar subject transfer defined by an independent definite article (oJ ejn ajgrwøv oJmoi/wß mh\ ejpistreya/tw).[145]

The negated adjective mhdei\ß likewise universalizes the injunction: w¢ste mhdei/ß kauca/sqw ejn anqrw/poiß (1 Cor 3:21), or mhdei\ß peirazo/menoß lege/tw o¢ti jApo qeouv peira/zomai (Jas 1:13).[146] Jas 1:13 could easily be converted to a determinate subject transfer: oJ peirazo/menoß mh\ lege/tw ktl. Thus, the negative adjective also demonstrates the close relationship of the various nominative constructs in subject transfers.[147]

### Emphatic Object Transfer

There are 66 third person imperatives in this class, wherein the subject of the third person imperative is the result of the “transfer” of an object (direct or indirect), generally from an implied (or actual) second person imperatival context. The subject of the second person imperatival action remains the same, but the object is brought forward by the third person as the subject for emphasis.[148] The party responsible for carrying out the imperative is the listening/reading audience except in the few cases where the speaker himself is also responsible,[149] or where an intermediary is used.[150] The third person allows the writer/speaker to shift his focus to the object of the subject’s actions: “Shine your light” (second person) to “Your light must shine” (third person), “Cease being angry by sunset” to “The sun must not set on your anger.” That object may also be another person: “Put him to death” (second person) to “He must be put to death” (third person).[151]

The grammatical structures employed to make object transfers are more complex than those with subject transfers. The immediate, and sometimes extended, context is the determining factor for identifying the “true” subject responsible for carrying out the imperative.[152] In this sense, this classification is more a product of pragmatic rather than simple syntactical considerations.

In the majority of cases (41), the subjects responsible for carrying out the action of third person imperatives in the object transfer class are defined by a second person construct in the immediate context; i.e., the third person imperative is conjoined or contiguous with a second person pronoun and/or a second person imperatival form.[153] The most obvious of this type are those where some action, possession or part of the responsible party’s body is the object transferred as the subject of the imperative: lamya/tw to\ fwvß uJmwvn (Matt 5:16); e¡stw de\ oJ lo/goß uJmwvn nai\ nai/, ou= ou¡ (Matt 5:37); mh\ gnw/tw hJ ajristera/ sou ti/ poieiv hJ dexia/ sou (Matt 6:3); pavsa pikri/a kai\ qumo\ß kai\ ojrgh\ kai\ kraugh\ kai\ blasfhmi/a ajrqh/tw ajf j uJmwvn (Eph 4:31).[154] John 14:1 is a good example where both a second person pronoun and imperative are used: Mh\ parasse/sqw uJmwvn hJ kardi/a, pisteu/ete eijß to\n qeo\n kai\ eijß ejme\ pisteu/ete.[155]

In some cases, the object emphasized is something outside of, but nevertheless under the control of, the audience.[156] Paul, personifying sin as a master, directs his readers who have died to sin to reject its dominion: Mh\ ou∞n basileue/tw hJ aJmarti/a enj twøv qnhtwøv uJmwvn sw/mati (Rom 6:12).[157] Likewise, sunset, which represents when the party is to cease his or her anger, is emphasized in Eph 4:26; the reader is perceived to be in control of the anger, and therefore in control of when it is ceased.[158] Paul commands that both hJ eijrh/nh and lo/goß touv cristouvare to be present (brabeue/tw . . . ejnoikei/tw) in his readers (Col 3:15 - 16).[159] Some form of the expression uJmivn gnwsto\n e¡stw is found four times in Acts instructing the audience to receive certain information.[160]

On six occasions in the New Testament the subjects of the third person imperatives are people who are the implied direct objects of commands to the audience.161 After Jesus healed the two blind men, he commanded them JOravte mhdei\ß ginwske/tw, (Matt 9:30). The third person slightly intensifies the command from the second person “See to it, tell no one!” to “See to it, no one is to know!” In Eph 5:6 Paul is not forbidding kenoivß lo/goiß to those who might use them, so deceiving the church, but rather he is forbidding the church to allow itself to be deceived (Mhdei\ß uJmavß ajpata/tw).[162]

An interesting example occurs in Luke 7:7 when the centurion says to Jesus eijpe\ lo/gwø, kai\ ijaqh/tw oJ paivß mou. In Matt 8:8 the third person passive imperative is changed to a third person passive future (ijaqh/setai). Essentially, the centurion is making an implied conditional statement: “If you say the word, my servant will be healed.”[163]

There are 25 occurrences of third person imperative object transfers in the New Testament in which those responsible for carrying out the action cannot be determined by syntactical constructs. The immediate or extended context must otherwise imply who the responsible party or parties are. However, the implications are not always clear.[164]

Third person imperatives are frequently used in the Septuagint for capital crimes.[165] For obvious reasons, the subject of the imperative could not be expected to execute it. In various ways, the congregation of Israel itself was the responsible party to carry out the imperative (Lev 24:16). In the New Testament, there are only two parallel references to capital punishment using a third person imperative (Matt 15:4; Mark 7:10). Jesus quotes Exod 21:16, which he cites against his Jewish antagonists, having no thought of anyone carrying out the command. 166 In the original context, it is difficult to determine who, if anyone, would actually put the rebellious child to death.[167]

With a verb of similar nature, there is little doubt who the speakers intended to have execute their command: Staurwqh/tw ... Staurwqh/tw (Matt 27:22 - 23). Pilate specifically asked the crowd what he was to do with Jesus (Ti/ ou∞n poih/sw jIhsouvn). The parallels reflect this clearly by using second person singular imperatives (Mark 15:13 - 14; Luke 23:21; John 19:6).

Variations of the theme kata\ th\n pi/stin uJmwvn genhqh/tw uJmivn occur three times in Matthew (8:13; 9:29; 15:28). The subjects of the imperatives are healings, the objects of Jesus’ actions in response to requests of faith. In this case, the speaker views himself as the party responsible to execute the imperative (see also Gen 37:27). Although these might be construed as a form of blessing, blessings in the traditional sense do not occur with the third person imperative in the New Testament.[168]

The modern common expression “The Lord’s will be done” is not so common in the Bible; it is found only in Acts 21:14.169 The subject of the third person imperative (gine/sqw) is the will of the Lord. It is the desire of the speaker that both the disciples and Paul do whatever God wills in the controversy over the apostle’s forthcoming trip to Jerusalem.

There are six object transfers in the Pauline epistles where the responsible party must be inferred from the context. Paul writes to Titus: manqane/twsan de\ kai\ oiJ hJme/teroi kalwvn e¡rgwn proi/stasqai ... (3:14). This is an injunction directed at Titus to “Teach our own [people] to be concerned about good works ...” If their own people read the directive to the evangelist, as modern readers do, they would understand the imperative as binding on them.170 This is well illustrated in Josephus: maqane/twsan de\ kai\ oiJ paivdeß prwvton tou\ß no/mouß (Ant. 4.211). These are general instructions written to the Israelites; the Septuagint makes it clear whose responsibility it is: dida/xete aujta\ ta\ te/kna uJmwvn (Deut 11:19).

In Paul’s first letter to Timothy two object transfers enjoin what is the responsibility of the whole church: kai\ ou¢toi (i.e., diako/nouß, 3:8) de\ dokimaze/sqwsan prwvton (3:10a),[171] and oiJ kalwvß proestwvteß presbu/teroi diplhvß timhvß ajxiou/sqwsan (5:17).[172] The responsibility is narrower in v. 16. The believing woman who has widowed relatives is not to burden the church with their care.[173]

The direct objects of the four verbs e¡cei constitute the plural subject of the singular third person imperative in 1 Cor 14:26: pa/nta pro\ß oijkodomh\n gine/sqw. This injunction serves as a summary introduction (explicated by nine third person imperatives in vv. 27 - 30, 34 - 35), and forms an inclusio with the summary conclusion in v. 40: pa/nta (same object transfers as in v. 26) de\ eujschmo/nwß kai\ kata\ ta/xin gine/sqw. Verse 39 demonstrates that the responsible parties are the saints in the reading audience (ajdelfoi, followed by two second person imperatives), which is implied in v. 26 (ajdelfoi/).[174]

Perhaps one third person imperative in the New Testament is an axiom: gine/sqw de\ oJ qeo\ß ajlhqh/ß, pavß de\ a¡nqrwpoß yeu/sthß (Rom 3:4). The apostle is not calling upon anyone to prove God true and every person a liar. The context demonstrates that the truth of the statement is verified by the unrighteousness of humanity. C. E. B. Cranfield states, “The use of the imperative is a vigorous way of stating the true situation after the emphatic rejection of an altogether false suggestion.”[175] It is the responsibility of the readers simply to recognize the imperative’s validity.

A special sub-category of object transfers is prayer.[176] The force of the imperative in prayer is generally understood as optative, with God presupposed as the party responsible to carry out the request.[177] Of 13 third person imperatives in prayers in the New Testament, it is the case that five follow this general understanding. In Matt 26:39 Jesus prays: Pa/ter mou, eij dunato/n ejstin, parelqa/tw ajp j ejmouv to\ poth/rion touvto. Jesus wants his Father to free him from the coming passion.

The remaining four imperatives with an optative sense are taken from Old Testament quotes (Acts 1:20a, b; Rom 11:9 - 10).[178] Both Peter and Paul draw analogies from the same imprecatory Psalm (68:23 - 24, 26) requesting that God judge his enemies. The apostles proclaim that this has been accomplished, in contemporary terms, as consequences of Judas and Israel’s actions respectively.[179]

The majority of third person imperatives in New Testament prayer contexts (8) have an obligatory force; the third person imperative with an object transfer expresses what the petitioner perceives must be carried out by himself and/or others. Jesus’ instructive prayers in Matt 6:9 - 10 and Luke 11:2 are essentially second person imperatives: “sanctify God’s name” (see Isa 8:13), “do God’s will” (likely a parallelism with “his kingdom come”). Those in Jesus’ audience would naturally understand themselves as subject to these injunctions.180 There does not seem to be any sense of the speaker requesting that God allow (“let”) these things to occur, or that God make them occur;181 it is understood that they are to occur.182 To classify them in the traditional sense of having an optative force (the speaker wishes they would happen) softens the intention of Jesus’ instruction to his disciples and his own words in the garden, which are specific applications of these earlier injunctions (Matt 26:42; Luke 22:42).[183] The remainder of the imperatives in these prayers (Matt 6:11 - 13; Luke 11:3 - 4) does not have an obligatory sense, but rather an optative sense seeking fulfillment from God.[184]

Peter in Acts 1:20c quotes from a prayer which carries only an optative force th\n ejpiskoph\n aujtouv labe/tw e¢teroß (Ps 108:8, Septuagint). The apostle, however, understands the fulfillment to be an obligation upon himself and those with him (vv. 21 - 26). Although the imperative in prayers often has an optative force, it is noteworthy that Peter changes the form of the Psalm from an optative (la/boi) to the third person imperative. K. L. McKay points out that by making this shift, Peter “was applying it more directly to a situation which he saw as requiring action which could readily be taken, than the Psalmist’s wish for God to act and proposal for desirable possibilities.”[185]

In the preceding eight cases, an imperatival transfer takes place from responsibility falling upon the addressee to others, which includes the speakers themselves. The third person allows the obligatory sense to be maintained without it appearing as if God were obliged. This class could be called reflexive object transfer; it implies the responsibility for fulfillment falls back on the speaker, and perhaps others among whom he is included.[186]

I located 164 (including some variants) third person imperatives in prayer contexts in the Septuagint, most of which (ca. 75 percent) have an optative force expressing a desire or seeking permission. However, many of the remainder might be considered obligatory, with a reflexive sense. The Psalmist cries to God, plhrwqh/tw to\ sto/ma mou aijne/sewß o¢pwß uJmnh/sw th\n do/xan sou (70:8); he surely is not asking permission or expressing something he simply desires to do; he sees it as his obligation.[187] Raguel, praising God in prayer, declares, eujlogei/twsa/n se oiJ a¢gioi/ sou, kai\ pavsai aiJ kti/sei sou, kai\ pa/nteß oiJ a¡ggeloi/ sou, kai\ oiJ ejklektoi/ sou, eujlogei/twsa/n se eijß tou\ß aijwvnaß (Tob 8:15).[188] Trustworthiness (ejmpisteuqh/twsan) of the prophets (among whom Sirach likely considers himself, 51:23) is the responsibility of the prophets themselves (Sir 36:15).

### Conditional Constructs

The remaining third person imperatives (54) are classified, with respect to syntactical categories, as conditional constructs. The third person imperative is in the apodosis of either a first or third class conditional sentence.[189] In all but 14 cases, the imperative is effectively an emphatic subject transfer, and therefore the responsible party for carrying out the imperative is the one who meets the condition in the protasis. As with subject transfers above, in nearly every case the responsible party is either in the immediate audience or in the “implied” audience.[190] In the 14 object transfer cases the responsible party is the listening/reading audience determined by either a second person form in the immediate context (Matt 10:13; 18:17; 26:39; Acts 4:10) or contextual implication (1 Cor 7:15; 11:6; 16:22; Gal 1:8 - 9; 2 Thess 3:10; 1 Tim 5:4). In one case involving prayer (Matt 26:42), the sense is reflexive.[191] Three different conditional constructs can be identified: indefinite, specified, and mixed.[192]

The majority of cases (31) are indefinite conditions. 193 In an indefinite condition the subject—which is necessarily always singular—of the third person imperative in the apodosis is the referent of an indefinite singular pronoun subject (tiß) in the protasis.[194] The pronoun tends to universalize the condition beyond, but never exclusive of, the immediate listening or reading audience.[195] In a few cases, the intended audience is grammatically, but not practically, limited by a personal pronoun. For example, in Jas 1:5-6 the protasis has the phrase tiß uJmwvn lei/petai with aijtei/tw two times in the apodosis. The address is to “anyone” in James’ immediate audience (uJmwvn), and though a second person imperative might seem appropriate (“ask God”), number and person agreement is retained with the third person imperative. Pronouns which appear to narrow the scope of tiß in conditional sentences occur only here and in 1 Cor 3:18b; 2 Thess 3:10; 1 Pet 4:16.196 In pragmatic terms however, these indefinite conditions have the same scope as those without qualifying pronouns.

The examples of indefinite subjects in third person imperatives are fairly straightforward. Typical is Matt 16:24 (and the parallels Mark 8:34; Luke 9:23).197 Jesus said to his disciples, Ei¡ tiß qe/lei ojpi/sw mou ejlqeivn, ajparnhsa/sqw eJauto\n kai\ ajra/tw to\n stauro\n aujtouv kai\ ajkolouqei/tw moi. The indefinite pronoun refers to “anyone” who desires to be Jesus’ disciple, whether in the immediate audience or not. The third person imperatives enjoin what is required of “anyone” with such a desire.

Likewise, Paul addresses a specific occasion about marital problems in the Corinthian church with an indefinite condition which has a universal application: ei¡ tiß ajdelfo\ß gunaivka e¡cei a¡piston kai\ au¢th suneudokeiv oijkeivn met j aujtouv, mh\ ajfie/tw aujth/n (1 Cor 7:12 with v. 13). In both of these cases, the third person imperative is a subject transfer.198

As mentioned above, a few conditional constructs have third person object transfers. In such cases, the apodosis may also set forth a consequence: ei¡ tiß ouj qe/lei ejrga/zesqai, mhde\ ejsqie/tw (2 Thess 3:10). Paul is directing the church not to feed (support) anyone who refuses to work.

Included among object transfers are curses: ei¡ tiß ouj fileiv to\n ku/rion, h¡tw ajna/qema (1 Cor 16:22); ajlla\ kai\ eja\n hJmeivß h= a¡ggeloß ejx oujranouv eujaggeli/zhtai uJmivn par j o§ eujhggelisa/meqa uJmivn, ajna/qema e¡stw…ei¡ tiß uJmavß eujaggeli/zetai par jo§ parela/bete, ajna/qema e¡stw (Gal 1:8 - 9).[199] The subjects of these imperatives are those who meet the conditions of the protases. They cannot be expected to carry out the curse on themselves; the imperatives represent the consequences of their actions. However, these are probably not examples of imperatives in imprecations taking the place of the optative common in classical Greek.[200] The force of the apodoses in these curses is certain, not only possible, if the protases are fulfilled. Paul is stating what will be, not what he hopes will be: “Paul is here not expressing a wish but a verdict.”[201] McKay suggests “Paul is appealing to his flock to pay no attention to certain people (to treat them as accursed) rather than praying for God‘s curse on them.”[202] In other words, these “curses” are not imprecatory prayers, but commands to the readers to treat such people as outside God’s grace. Lenski is correct to emphasize that neither Paul nor his readers could render the verdict themselves: “Anyone who promulgates a different and contrary gospel is eo ipso ‘accursed,’ not because we say so, but because Christ has said so, and we only repeat his judgment.”[203]

The second category of conditional constructs is specified conditions (16).[204] In a specified condition the subject—which can be either singular or plural—of the third person imperative in the apodosis is the referent of the subject of the protasis, which is clearly defined (specified) and tends to, thereby, restrict the audience. In two conditional constructs with inverted elements,205 the mocking crowds at the cross cry out rJusa/sqw nuvn eij qe/lei aujto/n (the antecedent for the subject is qeo/n) (Matt 27:43) and swsa/tw eJauto/n, eij ou¢to/ß ejstin oJ cristo/ß touv qeouv oJ ejklekto/ß (Luke 23:35). Each imperative is fronted for emphasis.

Referring to the unmarried men (ajga/moiß) and widows (ch/raiß) in the preceding verse, Paul states, eij de\ oujk ejgkrateu/ontai, gamhsa/twsan (1 Cor 7:9). However, to those already married (gegamhko/sin), he commands the wife, eja\n de\ kai\ cwrisqhøv, mene/tw a¡gamoß h= twvø ajndri\ katallagh/tw, and so also the husband (v. 11). The audiences are specified by the protases, and therefore restricted to those who meet the conditions.

Object transfers also occur in specified conditions.206 An excellent example is in Matt 18:17. In the immediate context (18:15-17), there are five third class conditions. The subject in the protasis of each is the brother who sins. The subject of the first four apodoses is the audience, addressed by four second person singular imperatives and one second person singular indicative. In the fifth apodosis, the expected object (the sinful brother) becomes the subject (through the third person imperative), the expected subject (the second person singular) becomes the indirect object (soi). In the first four conditions Jesus’ emphasis is on the actions of the audience, instructing them to implement discipline upon the sinful brother. If this process fails, the emphasis shifts to the consequences of the sinful brother’s refusal to listen: eja\n de\ kai\ thvß ejkklhsi/aß parakou/shø, e¡stw soi w¢sper oJ ejqniko\ß kai\ oJ telw/nhß. This emphasis would have been lost had Jesus followed with another second person imperative: “Treat him as a...”

The third person imperative in 1 Cor 7:15 is also an object transfer: eij de\ oJ a¡pistoß cwri/zetai, cwrize/sqw. The subject of the imperative is the unbeliever who divorces, but the injunction is for the believer who is being divorced. Taken with vv. 15b-16 it seems clear the apostle is not obligating the believer to divorce, but only suggesting it as the prudent course, or granting permission. This is a practical exhortation (hortative force); the believer may not be able to do anything about the divorce the unbeliever pursues. Thus, Paul’s exhortation must go beyond a recognition of the fact of the divorce; that would only be stating the obvious. His words must recognize the divorce as legitimate, thereby freeing the believer from the covenant obligations to which he or she would otherwise be bound (7:10 - 11 with Matt 19:1 - 9)—thus, ouJ dedou/lwtai.[207]

The remaining conditional constructs (7), could be viewed as a sub-category of specified conditions, but I have separated them because there is a change of subject between the protasis and the apodosis. Accordingly, I have named them mixed conditions. In a mixed condition the subject—singular or plural—of the third person imperative in the apodosis differs from the subject of the protasis; the new subject is introduced from the context and (as in specified conditions) it tends to restrict the condition.[208] Two are subject transfers. Festus told the Jews accusing Paul, ei¡ ti/ ejstin jn twøv ajndri\ a¡topon kathgorei/twsan (i.e., oiJ dunatoi\) aujtouv (Acts 25:5). The leaders of the Jews, who were among those listening, are singled out for emphasis. Also, in 1 Cor 14:30 Paul instructed prophets in the assembly concerning the delivery of prophecy: eja\n de\ a¡llwø ajpokalufqhøv kaqhme/nwø, oJ prwvtoß siga/tw. The one speaking when another received a revelation was to cease speaking and let the prophet with the new revelation speak.

The remaining five mixed conditions are object transfers.[209] Jesus instructed the twelve about to embark upon a mission journey to let their peace rest only on those houses that were worthy (Matt 10:13). In 1 Cor 11:6b the apostle said eij de\ aijscro\n gunaiki\ to\ kei/rasqai h= xuravsqai, katakalupte/sqw.[210] As in the preceding specified condition (v. 6a), the woman is the subject of the third person imperative. The party responsible to carry out the injunction is the church; they are not to exclude a woman whose head has been shaved.[211]

Finally, 1 Tim 5:4 is the only example in the New Testament where tiß occurs in the protasis with a subject shift in the apodosis.[212] The objects in the protasis (te/kna h= e¡kgona) become the subjects of the apodosis, as well as the implied subjects of the first class conditions in vv. 8 and 16.[213] The primary theme of this section is caring for needy widows, first by family members (vv. 4, 8, 16a), and absent of family members, by the church (v. 16b). Secondarily, the “enrollment” of widows (vv. 9 - 15) is a separate, yet related issue.[214] Verse 4 makes a shift in emphasis from the responsibility of qualifying widows to those responsible for their care. The first class condition in vv. 9-10 contains a third person imperative with the widow as the subject, but the directive is toward the church. With this use of the third person imperative, the stress throughout is upon those caring for needy widows.[215]

In the four sources examined (New Testament, Septuagint, Philo, and Josephus), every third person imperative fell into one of the three syntactical/semantic categories identified: emphatic subject transfers, emphatic object transfers, and conditional constructs. Once the categories were inductively identified, there was little difficulty classifying each third person imperative. I have attempted to use terminology that best describes what is taking place with regard to the subject of the third person imperative.

## Pragmatic Categories of the Third Person Imperative

The purpose of this chapter is to consider the third person imperative with respect to authorial intent and context. The attempt is to go beyond semantic and/or syntactical categories in search of “meaning.” This is a formidable task and must be limited by its very nature.[216] As demonstrated in the previous chapter, it is nearly impossible to isolate the syntactical, semantic, and pragmatic tasks. For example, when determining the “true” subject (responsible party) of third person imperative in the object transfer class, the context must provide the answer. Even in the case of a subject transfer, the concept of “transfer” is drawn from the context. Perhaps only indefinite and specified conditional constructs with subject transfers in the apodoses are determined by purely syntactical and semantic factors.

It is beyond the scope of this thesis to deal with every New Testament third person imperative in pragmatic terms. I have chosen to deal with two general areas of concern in summary form: the levels of “force” or imperatival intensity and the contextual party(ies) responsible to carry out the imperative.217 Following this, new insights are given to two case studies (Acts 2:38 and 1 Cor 14:27-28), in light of what this thesis has revealed concerning the use of third person imperatives.

### Levels of Force

There is universal recognition that imperatives function on different levels of intensity and only the context determines the force or stress they carry.[218] Sometimes when the third person imperative is discussed in relation to the second person, other issues concerning intensity are raised,[219] but generally it is recognized that the force of the third person imperative is at least equal to that of the second person: “The third person Greek imperative is as strongly directive as the second person.”[220] This is manifestly demonstrated in legal or legislative material where the third person imperative is a common occurrence.[221] It is arguable, especially in some cases of subject transfers (above pp. 22 - 27), that the third person increases the intensity over the second person because it narrows the focus of the command to each individual in the audience.[222]

Although the classification of some cases is somewhat subjective and open to debate, I have identified essentially three general levels of imperatival intensity among third person imperatives: obligatory, hortative, and optative.223 The majority (197) have an obligatory force, i.e., the imperative has full imperatival intensity obligating the responsible party(ies) to act in a particular manner. In most cases this sense is obvious: Mh\ ou∞n basileue/tw hJ aJmarti/a enj twøv qnhtwøv uJmwvn sw/mati (Rom 6:12); Ei¡ tiß qe/lei ojpi/sw mou ejlqeivn, ajparnhsa/sqw eJauto\n kai\ ajra/tw to\n stauro\n aujtouv kai\ ajkolouqei/tw moi (Matt 16:24).224 Considering the consequences of not doing what is commanded in these passages, it is difficult to imagine Paul and Jesus only exhorting (hortative level) their audiences.

However, the sense is not always so obvious. When Jesus told the blind men concerning their healings, kata\ th\n pi/stin uJmwvn genhqh/tw uJmivn (Matt 9:29 cf. 8:13; 15:28), he was essentially saying, “It must be done for you because of your faith.” He was obligating himself to so respond according to their faith.[225] In each case where the speaker views himself as the party responsible to carry out the action of the imperative (i.e., the imperative is “reflexive”), the force is obligatory. Such is true in some cases of prayer (Matt 6:9 - 10; 26:42; Luke 11:2; 22:42; Acts 1:20c).[226]

Forms of the expression uJmivn gnwsto\n e¡stw (Acts 2:14; 4:10; 13:38; 28:28) are sometimes understood as “an exhortation or strong wish.”[227] However semantically and syntactically the force must be stronger. In each case the audience is instructed to know something which is immediately revealed to them; they have no choice but to know it. Note also in Acts 2:14 Peter follows the third person imperative with a second person imperative (ejnwti/sasqe ta\ rJh/mata/ mou). Peter does not appear to be expressing a desire (although it is), or simply exhorting the audience to listen; he is demanding it.[228] In Acts 4:10 the imperative is in the apodosis of a condition (v. 9). If the protasis is true, the apodosis must follow, whether or not the audience accepts what Peter reveals.

Most of the imperatives in the epistles are obligatory and fairly straightforward. However, some, taken out of context, would appear to make little sense. For example, in 1 Cor 11:34 the apostle instructs the Corinthian saints, ei¡ tiß peinavø, ejn oi¡kwø ejsqie/tw. The force of the imperative is obligatory as the apodosis of the indefinite condition. However, is Paul forbidding the church to eat when it assembles together? The protasis contains the understood meaning (in peinavø) that the individual is not willing, or is unable, to submit to the command ajllh/louß ejkde/cesqe (v. 33); in such a case, eating at home is mandated. Paul cannot be forbidding what he has just allowed (sunerco/menoi eijß to\ fageivn).

I have included 31 third person imperatives as having a hortative force; i.e., the imperative does not have full imperatival intensity, and only suggests a response. These can be best understood under four categories. The first category contains warnings—in light of possible circumstances, the subject is urged to respond in a certain manner. Jesus prophetically warned his disciples to flee Jerusalem when it was under siege by the Romans (Matt 24:15 - 18 and parallels).[229] Paul warned the Ephesian saints not to be deceived by empty words (Eph 5:6).

The second category contains practical exhortations—given the circumstances, the subject is encouraged to accept certain realities or act in a certain manner. Jesus encourages his apostles in light of his departure (John 14:1, 27). James encourages the one who helps restore someone wandering from the truth (5:19 - 20).

A peculiar case occurs in Rev 22:11. The force of the imperatives is probably hortative, addressed to John (kai\ le/gei moi, v. 10).[230] In v. 10 the force of the subjunctive (mh\ sgragi/shøß, “do not seal up”) addressed to John is imperatival. The general sense is that the book, with its revelations about coming judgment, is not to be sealed up “for the time is near.” The imminence of the coming judgment is thematic in both the opening and closing of the book: oJ kairo\ß ga\r ejggu/ß eJstin (1:3; 22:10); iJdou\ e¡rcomai tacu/ (22:7, 12, 20; 3:11); a¢ deiv gene/sqai eJn ta/cei (1:1; 22:6). This is in stark contrast to the revelations given Daniel: “seal up the vision for it pertains to many days hence” (8:26 cf. 10:14; 12:4, 9). If the visions of Daniel 8 were fulfilled in the second century BC Maccabean period, which is the consensus, and Daniel made the prophecies in the sixth century BC, 231 a period of less than 400 years constitutes “many days hence.” Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that John’s revelations were to be fulfilled in less time, sometime in the immediate future.[232]

Aside from theological considerations, the grammar and immediate context alone determine the sense of the imperatives. The imminence of the coming judgment suggests that the status of the evil and the righteous are not going to change before it occurs.[233] No doubt, the righteous would heed “the words of the prophecy” and the unrighteous would not (1:3 cf. 2:21; see Ezek 3:27). Thus, John is directed to let each of them continue as they are.[234]

It is highly unlikely that the unrighteous are addressed; they would not be encouraged to continue in unrighteousness. Thus, the righteous are only indirectly addressed as they read John’s record. John is therefore exhorted to allow the righteous to continue in righteousness (which would be expected), and the unrighteous to continue in unrighteousness (which would be unexpected). Time is the controlling factor; there is not enough time for the necessary heart changes to be made.[235] John is not to expect this revelation to bring any substantial changes with regard to the universal status of the church and its adversaries. Repentance does not seem to be an option.

A third possible hortative category is reasonable expectation—given the circumstances, the subject is expected to act, or be able to act, in a particular manner. I have included only the conditional constructs in Luke 23:35 and Matt 27:43 in this class. Given the truth of the protasis, the imperative in the apodosis is reasonable, even though it is stated in mockery—the protasis is denied by those uttering the imperative. However, should Christ fulfill the imperative, they would accept the truth of the protasis (cf. Matt 27:42; Mark 15:32).

The final category on the hortative level is permission— given the circumstances, the subject is permitted, but not required, to act in a particular manner. I have included only the conditional construct in 1 Cor 7:15 in this class: the married disciple is given permission to divorce if the unbeliever seeks it.236 Most include more imperatives in the permissive category.[237]

The final level of force is the optative— the imperative does not have imperatival intensity, but only expresses a wish or desire, requesting a response. The failure to respond would bring no consequences to the addressee, but perhaps a subjective response (discouragement, etc.) from the one making the request. All but one occurrence (Acts 21:14, which is essentially a statement of faith) are specifically related to prayer. The prayers are of two types: reflexive, the petition is made on behalf of self (Matt 26:39),238 and imprecatory, the petition is made against others (Acts 1:20a,b; Rom 11:9 - 10).

### Responsible Party

As with second person imperatives, the party responsible to carry out the action in the majority (203) of third person imperatives is the immediate listening/reading audience, or a part thereof, as qualified; thus, they effectively act like second person imperatives. This may include the “implied” audience—those intended or expected to hear/read whether or not they are in the immediate audience.239 For example, Matt 5:16 addresses two immediate audiences: the crowds to whom Jesus was speaking and Matthew’s readers. The epistles obviously address one immediate audience—those to whom the epistles were written. Much has already been said about the responsible parties in Chapter II, particularly under “Emphatic Object Transfer.” The purpose here is to summarize.

In 19 cases, the responsible party is not in the listening/reading audience, nor is he/she expected to respond to the imperative apart from someone in the immediate audience acting as an intermediary.240 This is analogous to Glaze’s “true third person” given “through an intermediary.”241 Included in this category are Luke 16:29; Acts 16:37; 19:38; 24:20; nearly all the passages in 1 Timothy and Titus, which are addressed to these individuals.242

The final 12 cases I have labeled “reflexive” because the speaker perceives himself as the responsible party.243 Most occur in prayers addressing God with an object transfer imperative (contiguous with second person imperatives in some cases) (Matt 6:9-10; Luke 11:2). A few occur in contexts with Jesus referring to his own healing actions in response to a person’s faith (Matt 8:13; 9:29; 15:28), or his own obedience to the Father’s will (Matt 26:42; Luke 22:42). Peter interprets a Psalm addressed to God as being fulfilled by himself and those with him appointing someone to fill Judas’ apostolic office (Acts 1:20c). The disciples who tried to persuade Paul not to go to Jerusalem unsuccessfully, declared “The Lord’s will be done,” referring to both themselves and Paul (Acts 21:14).244

### Two Case Studies

In this section, it is my intention to incorporate some of the results of this study that have interpretive value for particular passages. I have chosen two; the first (Acts 2:38) has greater theological significance than the second (1 Cor 14:28), but each has been affected.

The relationship of baptism to the forgiveness of sins in Acts 2:38 has long been discussed and variously resolved. In particular, the juxtaposition of the second and third person imperatives has been used to argue both for and against a direct relationship between baptism and forgiveness. However, this passage, perhaps as much as any other, has been the victim of eisegesis—theology controlling exegesis. Commenting on this passage Robertson states: “When the grammarian has finished, the theologian steps in, and sometimes before the grammarian is through.”[245]

Much of the discussion revolves around the meaning of the preposition eijß, which is beyond the scope of this thesis.[246] The question addressed here is the relationship between the two imperatives metanoh/sate and baptisqh/tw. Much has been made of the change from the second person to the third person, particularly when the causal use of eijß is recognized as untenable. If forgiveness of sins is the result of repentance, as most agree, then the conjunctive force of kai/ with metanoh/sate and baptisqh/tw must be avoided, if baptism is not also understood to result in the forgiveness of sins.247 Roberts traces the argument for the disjunction between the two commands as far back as 1860.[248]

Concerning this disjunction, Robertson goes so far as to claim:

> [There is a] change of number from plural to singular and of person from second to third. This change marks a break in thought here that the English translation does not preserve. The first thing to do is make a radical and complete change of heart and life. Then let each one be baptized after this change has taken place,...So I understand Peter to be urging baptism on each of them who had already turned (repented) and for it to be done in the name of Jesus Christ on the basis of the forgiveness of sins which they had already received (emphasis mine).[249]

Robertson appears to force the disjunction upon the text by theology.250 Had Peter’s audience already repented, the command to repent would have been meaningless.

Against a disjunction, Carroll Osburn argues that idiomatic usage allows for disagreement of person and number between Greek subjects and verbs, citing among other idioms the distributive use of the third person imperative singular with the second person imperative plural.251 However, the argument against the conjunction of the verbs in Acts 2:38 confuses the “rule” of concord in person and number between subject and verb—there is concord in this case—with an imagined “rule” that the same plural subject (in this case Peter’s audience) cannot be the subject of both a plural verb and a singular verb. Peter’s audience is the plural aujtou/ß, thus the plural metanoh/sate. The singular baptisqh/tw is also in concord with its person and subject, e¢kastoß uJmwvn, which is the same audience (plural uJmwvn). The use of e¢kastoß in this way violates no “rule” of agreement between person and number in the subject of Greek verbs. That is not the issue in Acts 2:38. Clearly the subject of both verbs is the same, which can be demonstrated by removing either imperative: “And Peter said to them, ‘[You plural] repent in the name of Jesus etc.,’” or “And Peter said to them, ‘Each one of you (plural) must be baptized (singular, in agreement with e¢kastoß) in the name of Jesus etc.’”

Three of the examples Osburn cites (Josh 6:10; 4 Kings 10:19; 1 Macc 10:63) to demonstrate the distributive imperatival usage of third person in conjunction with second person imperatives are not strictly analogous to Acts 2:38. In each example there is a shift in the subject between the second and third person imperatives, even though the same audience is addressed and responsible to carry out the commands. These examples have object transfers in the third person imperatives, where subject transfers are required to be analogous with Acts 2:38.[252]

I located over 80 passages in the Septuagint with second and third person imperatives in juxtaposition. Of these only ten are analogous to Acts 2:38. To be analogous, a single audience (with a plurality of subjects) must be addressed, there must be at least two juxtaposing second and third person imperatives,[253] and a subject transfer must occur in the third person imperative. The transition from a second person plural to a third person singular imperative does not diminish the force or extent of either injunction upon the audience:

> [Joshua] said to them [twelve men from the tribes of Israel], go (Prosaga/gete) before me in the presence of the Lord in the midst of the Jordan, and having taken up a stone from there, each (e¢kastoß) must carry (ajra/tw) it on his shoulders according to the number of the twelve tribes of Israel. (Josh 4:5)[254]

In the New Testament, I was able to identify five additional passages with the same grammatical construction. In 1 Cor 16:1 - 2 Paul instructs his readers, “Now concerning the collection of the saints, as I directed the churches of Galatia, so also you do (poih/sate). Every first day of the week, each of you (e¢kastoß uJmwvn) is to set [something] aside (tiqe/tw) by himself ...” This is a subject transfer which shifts the focus from the whole audience (the Corinthian church) to each individual in the audience.255 In Eph 5:25, 33 there is a subject transfer (ajgapavte ... ajgapa/tw) separated by considerable discussion, but grammatically the effect is identical.[256]

The so-called disjunction between metanoh/sate and baptisqh/tw is also defended based on the plural uJmwvn in the prepositional phrase eijß a¡fesin twvn aJmartiwvn uJmwvn. It is argued the plural uJmwvn agrees only with the plural metanoh/sate, and therefore goes only with repentance. It cannot go with the singular baptisqh/tw. Lanny Thomas Tanton considers this position, and argues that the grammars do not deal with agreement between number in verbs and prepositional phrases, as if that were an argument against the position, and so he dismisses it.[257]

Luther B. McIntyre Jr. is the most recent advocate of the so-called “rule of concord” between the pronoun uJmwvn in the prepositional phrase and the verbs as the major grammatical argument against the necessity of baptism.258 He states, “The basic rule of concord stipulates that a personal pronoun (in this case uJmwvn) agrees with its antecedent in gender and number.”[259] Following the idea of concord between subject and predicate, he argues the plural uJmwvn of the prepositional phrase can only have as its antecedent the subject of the plural verb, “repent,” and not the singular verb, “be baptized.” He dismisses Osburn’s idiomatic exception based on the use of second and third person imperatives in conjunction because he claims the examples cited do have concord between verbs and pronouns. As he cited Osburn, this is true; however, Osburn did not cite the complete passage of Zech 7:10, and presumably McIntyre did not examine the text itself. The final phrase of the text connects the plural pronoun uJmwvn directly to a singular third person imperative: kai\ kaki/an e¢kastoß touv aJdelfouv auJtouv mh\ mnhsikakei/tw eJn taivß kardi/aß uJmwvn. According to McIntyre’s “rule” of concord between pronoun and its antecedent, this passages breaks the rule.[260] However, the preceding is not even necessary to demonstrate that the audience of all of Acts 2:38 is one, and that the second person plural metanoh/sate, the third person singular with e¢kastoß uJmwvn, and uJmwvn in the prepositional phrase all point back to auJtou/ß. The plural uJmwvn in the prepositional phrase has as its immediate antecedent the plural uJmwvn in the phrase e¢kastoß uJmwvn which is the subject of the singular baptisqh/tw. Plural agreement is found for both verbs in the form of the first, and in the subject pronoun of the second.

McIntyre’s conclusion as to the place of the command for baptism in Peter’s statement is pure casuistry:

> ...the command to be baptized is parenthetical and is not syntactically connected to remission of sins. When Peter commanded the people to repent, he was speaking to the crowd. Then the command to be baptized was directed to each individual. In the “remission of your sins” phrase, Peter again directed his words to the crowd collectively.261

He does not explain what the essential difference is in addressing “the crowd” and “each individual” in the crowd. He has created these artificial categories through a strained exegesis of the passage based on equally artificial “rules” of Greek grammar.

The various attempts to circumvent the most natural meaning of this passage have fallen short. Exegesis governed by theology has resulted in many convoluted grammatical arguments that cannot stand under careful examination. The distinction between subject and object transfers delineated in this thesis has helped clarify the issue; it is not simply a matter of second and third person imperatives in juxtaposition. Peter’s address to his audience is a clear example of a subject transfer where the subject of the third person imperative is always transferred from a second person imperative (in this case actual) in the same context. The effect, in this context, is to emphasize the personal responsibility of each person (third person singular) in the audience (second person plural) for his or her participation (direct or indirect) in the death of the Messiah. The sins of each person necessitated the gospel; no one could conceal his or her responsibility in the corporate sin of the audience. The baptism of each person would reveal this to all.262

A second passage this study sheds light on is 1 Cor 14:27-28—ei¡te glw/sshø tiß laleiv, kata\ du/o h= to\ pleivston treivß kai\ ajna\ me/roß, kai\ ei¢ß diermhneue/tw: eja\n de\ mh\ hø∞ diermhneuth/ß, siga/tw ejn ejkklhsi/aø, eJautwvø de\ lalei/tw kai\ twvø qewvø. The phrase kata\ du/o h= to\ pleivston treivß kai\ ajna\ me/roß modifies (restricts) tiß with regard to the number of people speaking tongues in any given assembly. The third person imperative in the apodosis is probably the referent of tiß (regardless of whether it is the first, second, or third speaker). Most of the translations, however, are ambiguous as to the subject of diermhneue/tw. Generally it is translated “let one interpret” (NASB, NAB, NRSV, KJV), occasionally “let someone interpret” (NIV), suggesting that someone other than one of the tongue speakers is to interpret. “Let one (ei¢ß) interpret” is literal; ei¢ß is probably a reference to one of the two or three tongues speakers, if two or three speak. The use of the third person imperative in the apodosis suggests it is the tongue speaker himself—or one of the tongue speakers— who is to interpret. Otherwise, this is the only occurrence of an indefinite conditional construct in the sources examined where a subject shift occurs between the apodosis and the protasis. Omitting the modifying clause and the ei¢ß necessitated by the clause, limits the confusion: “If anyone speaks in a tongue, he must interpret.”

Verse 28 can be translated consistently with either understanding mentioned above. The conditional construct is generally understood to mean: “If there is not an interpreter, he (the tongue speaker) must be silent etc.” This continues to leave the identity of the interpreter ambiguous—it could be, but does not demand, someone other than the tongue speakers themselves (cf. 12:10). However, it can be translated: “If he (the subject of the preceding condition) is not an interpreter, he (the same subject who speaks in a tongue) must remain silent.”[263]

The interpretation suggested here consistently retains the same subject throughout. Likewise, it is consistent with Paul’s use of the verb elsewhere in this chapter: “greater is the one prophesying than the one speaking in tongues unless he (i.e., the one speaking tongues, not someone, tiß, or another, a¡lloß) interprets” (v. 5); “therefore the one speaking a tongue must pray that he might interpret” (v. 13). Nothing in the context of this chapter or Paul’s only other use of the verb diermhneu/w (1 Cor 12:30, see also Luke 24:27; Acts 9:36) militates against this understanding of 14:27 - 28. Thus, it is more consistent with the characteristics of indefinite conditional constructs and the context than the traditional understanding which introduces a new subject.

## Function of the Present and Aorist Forms in the Third Person Imperative

The non-temporal nature of the imperative mood raises a question as to the functions of the present and aorist forms. The discussion that attempts to answer the question is often focused on the relationship of the imperative to the action itself, in reality. In other words, what was the nature of the action addressed by the imperative at the time it was spoken or written: existent or non-existent? In both prescriptive and prohibitive imperatives, were the present and aorist forms chosen based on whether or not the action was already in process?

This question has been answered basically two ways. The “traditional school” answers “Yes.”264 The present form addresses action already in progress, “Continue in what you are doing,” or “Stop what you are doing.” The aorist form addresses action not already in progress: “Start to do something,” or “Do not start to do something.”265 Of course, all who hold to this general “canon,” acknowledge “exceptions.”[266]

The “aspectual school” answers “No.” Not only do the exceptions militate against such a rule, but those of this school argue that the traditional understanding of tense itself has been misguided. It is better to understand the choice of tense forms based simply on the way the speaker/author viewed the action as he spoke/wrote it (aorist, as a whole; present, in progress), irrespective of the action as it may actually exist.[267]

Against the traditional school, it would seem the works of numerous scholars would have put the issue to rest long ago, especially with regard to the imperative in general.268 Nevertheless, most grammarians and interpreters continue on traditional assumptions.[269]

The results of this study are in accord with those that challenge the traditional view. The question mentioned above was continually before me as I examined each passage individually. Nothing unique about the use of the present and aorist forms with the third person imperative was revealed in the course of this study. What has elsewhere been concluded about imperatives in general, held true for the third person specifically.[270] In brief, the traditional approach to the present and aorist forms that suggests they are chosen in relation to the nature of the existing action failed to be upheld by at least three factors: context, nature of the material, and grammar.

### Context

The use of the present and aorist forms in over 25 percent of the third person imperatives militates against the traditional understanding, when examined in context. The traditional view of the prohibitive present (“Stop!”) would require that Peter’s readers were suffering as murders, thieves, evildoers, and meddlers (1 Pet 4:15). In Matt 9:30 mhdei\ß ginwske/tw makes little sense if the people already know—“Stop letting anyone know!”[271]

Do the prescriptive aorists (traditionally understood to mean “Start!”) in Rev 2:7, 11, 17, 29; 3:6, 13, 22; 13:9 mean that none in the churches had been listening, and the prescriptive presents in Matt 11:15; 13:9, 43; Mark 4:9, 23; Luke 8:8; 14:35 (traditionally understood to mean “Continue!”) mean the audiences had already been listening?[272] Likewise, in Rev 22:11 the aorists could not mean, “Start”—oJ ajdikwvn ajdikhsa/tw e¡ti ktl.[273]

In many cases of the prescriptive present, “Continue,” makes little sense. In Mark 13:14 Jesus says to/te (indicates the action about to be suggested is inceptive) oiJ ejn thvø jIoudai/aø feuge/twsan eijß ta\ o¡rh. In Acts 2:14 Peter addresses his audience with the words gnwsto\n e¡stw kai\ ejnwti/sasqe ta\ rJh/mata/ mou. The context is clear that the audience did not already know what he was about to tell them.274

Often, trying to maintain the traditional position leads to interpretive difficulties. What is the fundamental difference between Luke’s use of the present gine/sqw (22:42) and Matthew’s use of the aorist genhqh/tw (26:42)?275 Likewise, other parallel uses of present with aorist forms are problematic.276 In Deut 20:5 - 8 the present poreue/sqw is conjoined to the aorist ajpostrafh/tw denoting essentially the same action, both of which are necessarily ingressive as indicated by the context.

Also, when the present and aorist forms are compared in a given context, the traditional view becomes awkward. Such is the case in Eph 4:26 - 5:6. Winer cites part of Paul’s paraenesis (4:25-26, 28) in support of the traditional hypothesis that the present imperative “denotes action already begun and to be continued ..., or one that is permanent and frequently recurring.” However, he has to take it back in his discussion on 5:6: “On the other hand, the Pres. Imperat. also [as the aorist imperative] is often used in reference to what should not be begun at all.”[277] Louw points out

> ...the use of words like ple/on (mhk)e/ti [as in 4:28], pe/ra etc. shows clearly that the action referred to is going on, and it proves the point that the present imperative does not, or rather does not per se indicate that the action has already commenced at the time of speaking.278

In other words, these adverbs would be redundant if the idea of continuing action was inherent in the present tense. If klepte/tw negated by mh/ meant “Stop stealing!” by virtue of the present tense, mhke/ti klepte/tw would be pleonastic.[279]

The reason for the aorist (ajrqh/tw) in Eph 4:31 is difficult to determine, particularly since it is buried in a series of 17 imperatival present forms. It may be simply that the verb favors the aorist, particularly in the imperative.[280] The present imperatives with “lists” in 4:32 and 5:3 suggest the single aorist choice has nothing to do with the list per se.281 In this case, it may be set in contrast with the present gi/nesqe (4:32) that governs the virtues. The removal of the vices is viewed as a whole, suggesting completeness (thus, the aorist), whereas the virtues are viewed as on going (thus, the present). Whatever the case, the presence of this aorist does damage to the traditional view. Paul could not be telling his readers to start removing “bitterness and anger and wrath and clamor and slander ... with all evil” and at the same time tell them to continue “to be kind, tenderhearted, forgiving to each other.” There is a high probability these actions could not co-exist.

### Nature of the Material

In many cases, particularly in the epistles, it is difficult to determine whether or not an action was already in progress. Many imperatives in the epistles (some in the narrative material, as well as in the teachings of Jesus) are general in nature, not necessarily addressing existing actions or the lack of them, usually favoring the present tense.282 The most obvious type of general admonitions are in legal material where the present eclipses the aorist imperative.283 In the Septuagint most legal admonitions are in the future tense (which clearly does not address existing actions), but where the present and aorist are found, the present still dominates.284 In this way, the nature of the material argues against the traditional view that the particular tense form was chosen as it related to existing action.

Likewise, because of the general nature of much of the Pauline material, it is not surprising that over 75 percent of the total imperatives are in the present form.285 However, one would be hard pressed to hold that all of Paul’s choices for the present tense were made because of existing situations. Conversely, nearly 67 percent of Petrine imperatives are aorist. Does this suggest Peter was not addressing existing situations? Context must finally determine whether or not actions demanded or condemned were already in progress. Although it is likely real situations sometimes motivated paraenesis (e.g., Rom 14), such need not always be the case (e.g., Eph 4).

Some words that favor a particular tense militate against the suggestion that tense form is chosen based on its relationship to the action. For example, all the imperatival forms of eijmi/ occur in the present. Does this mean they always address action that is on going? The opposite seems to be true. In didactic material, it is generally omnitemporal (Matt 5:37; 18:17; Luke 12:35; 1 Cor 16:22; Gal 1:8 - 9; Jas 1:19; 5:12; 1 Pet 3:3). In conversational material, it generally has an ingressive sense (Acts 2:14; 4:10; 13:38; 28:28).

Some verbs by their very nature take a particular form in the imperative. For example, 199 of 209 occurrences in the Greek Bible of imperative forms of the cognates di/dwmi and ajpodi/dwmi are aorist. This is likely because the action is generally viewed as a whole, rather than as a progression. Thus, Jesus used the aorist in Matt 5:31. Paul on the other hand used the rare present (1 Cor 7:3; Eph 4:27). Was it because he was addressing actions already on going, or was it his propensity for the present in general admonitions, which have an omnitemporal sense?

The nature of some words in and of themselves prohibits the idea that the present tense addresses action that is already in process. The clearest examples are those words commanding someone be put to death (e.g., Matt 15:4; Mark 7:10; Lev 20:10 - 16; 24:16-21). The injunction cannot possibly mean “put him to death as you have been doing.”286 The present imperative of e¡rcomai is fatal to the traditional view that the present imperative refers to action already in progress; nearly every case is ingressive.[287]

### Grammar

Finally, certain grammatical considerations undermine the traditional view of tense choice for imperatives. The use of adverbial modifiers creates difficulties if the kind of action is inherent to the tense form. The adverb to/te in Matt 24:16 (and parallels) indicates the action in the present imperative is ingressive, and therefore not already in progress. In 2 Cor 10:7 pa/lin is used with the present logize/qw. Apparently, Paul’s opponents in Corinth had stopped considering Paul’s standing in Christ. Again, the present must be ingressive.288 The use of mhke/ti with klepte/tw in Eph 4:28 prevents the traditional view.[289]

Conversely, the adverbial aorist construction ajdikhsa/tw e¡ti in Rev 22:11 demonstrates that the prescriptive aorist imperative cannot always be understood to mean “Start.” Likewise, the so-called “punctiliar” or “once-for-all” notion is undermined.[290]

The imperatives in the apodoses of conditional constructs are timeless and generally omnitemporal, regardless of the temporal relation to existing action in the context.291 Of 54 conditional constructs, 38 have present (16 aorist) imperatives in the apodoses. In one case, Matt 16:24 (and parallels), the apodosis has three prescriptive imperatives (two aorists followed by one present): ajparnhsa/sqw eJauto\n kai\ ajra/tw to\n stauro\n aujtouv kai\ ajkolouqei/tw moi. If traditional thinking is followed, Jesus is telling his disciples already following him to start to deny themselves and pick up their crosses. However, the apodosis describes what ojpi/sw mou ejlqeivn in the protasis truly means, which is precisely what they are not doing: ¢Upage ojpi/sw mou, Satanav (v. 23 with vv. 21-22). The aorists with ajparne/omai and ai¡rw, and the present with ajkolouqe/w is what might be expected.292 The speaker is viewing the actions of self-denial and cross-bearing (probably synonymous)293 as complete (whole) decisive actions, and the action of following as a process.294 This condition is always true (omnitemporal) and timeless—its connection with the existing situation has no effect on the tenses chosen.

Must it be inferred from ajkoue/tw (Mark 4:23) that Jesus’ audience was listening, and from ajkousa/tw (Rev 13:9) that John’s audience was not listening?[295] If the traditional “rules” were applied to 1 Cor 11:6 they would self-defeat: “If a woman is not now (present) covered, she must cut it (aorist). But if it is (present implied) shameful for her to cut it or shave it (aorists), she must continue (present) to cover her head.” Thus, she is both not covered and must continue to cover her head as she is already doing; the second apodosis should have an aorist if the traditional view is correct. However, it seems clear Paul has not chosen his tenses based on what may or may not be going on in the Corinthian church. The timeless (and omnitemporal) nature of conditional constructs give him the freedom to state what is to be done without making direct accusations.[296]

In 1 Tim 5:3-16 there is a series of 13 present tense imperatival forms, including four third person imperatives, three of which are in conditional constructs (vv. 4, 9-10, 16). All the presents must be viewed as timeless; they do not inherently reveal the conditions stated as preexisting; if they are, that information must be implied in the context. Note the difficulty v. 16 gives to the traditional interpretation: “If any believing woman has widows, she must continue (as she has been) to assist them, and stop burdening the church.” With this understanding of the present tenses, Paul’s injunction offers nothing by way of his objective—lifting the burden on the church. The traditional view would require an aorist (ejparkesa/tw) in the apodosis instructing the believing woman to “start assisting.”297

The results drawn from the analysis of every third person imperative in the New Testament, and only partially reviewed in this chapter, suggest that the author’s (speaker’s) tense choice was not governed by the situation, as it actually existed in his audience. Approaching the text with preconceived “rules” as to how the tenses relate to the existing situation leads to confusing, awkward, and sometimes absurd interpretations.

## Translating the Third Person Imperative

Having examined the third person imperative with regard to the functions of mood and tense, what are the English forms that best communicate the meaning of the Greek text?298 The absence of a corresponding English form for the Greek third person imperative requires that forms be chosen which best communicate the original meaning—as much as it can be understood—without compromising certain elements of the known syntactical and semantic categories. Therefore, the Greek imperatives with respect to their relationship to other elements in the structural unit,[299] the level of imperatival intensity, and the party(ies) responsible to execute the action (Chapter III) must be taken into consideration.

The issues raised concerning the choice of the present and aorist tense forms in Greek, and their relationship to the action as it may have existed in reality (“aspect,” see Chapter IV), do not arise in English translation, with regard to which forms to choose, because English is not an inflectional language.300 Form has less influence in English than it does in Greek.[301] The relationship of the imperative itself to the existence of the action in reality is communicated by the context, if at all.302 It is also likely that for ancient Greek writers and speakers, issues about the kind of action—ingressive, egressive, durative, etc.—were no more a technical grammatical concern than they are for modern writers and speakers. Most do not write or speak conscious of grammatical nuances; they proceed intuitively from known existing circumstances: “they were probably of rather less concern to ancient writers and readers than they are to us.”[303]

With regard to the Greek tense forms used with the third person imperative, the conclusions of this study undermine the interpretive value of the traditional categories, but add little to matters of translation, because these categories have had a minimal (if any) influence on the major translations.304 Much more work is needed on the concept of “aspect” in the Greek tenses of the imperative before communication of the nuances between the tenses is possible in any receptor language (whether isolating, agglutinative, or inflectional). Therefore, the present and aorist tense forms in the third person imperative have little influence upon translation.

The second person form is clearly the primary form of the imperative in the Greek Bible.305 The choice of a third person form was not chosen out of necessity, because nearly every case could be converted into a second person imperative or some other substitute. Of course, this is the case in most Greek forms that suggests the forms chosen often served a particular purpose.[306] If such a purpose existed in the author’s mind when choosing the third person imperative over other forms, that purpose appears to have been emphasis. 307 The speaker or writer wanted to place emphasis upon each individual or particular groups within a larger listening or reading audience,[308] each individual within and beyond the immediate listening or reading audience,[309] or the object of the responsible party’s actions.310 Thus, English translation should reflect these emphases.

Although there is no corresponding form in English for the Greek third person imperative, there are alternatives that convey the same import.[311] All three English moods—indicative, subjunctive, and (second person) imperative—may be used effectively to communicate the Greek third person imperative. This can be accomplished with or without modal auxiliaries. However, better care translating can be taken than has been demonstrated in the past by choosing English forms that have the proper force.[312] Also, when the third person imperative provides emphasis, it is best to retain that emphasis as much as possible by carefully choosing English grammatical structures.[313] In short, a consciousness of both the level of intensity and the subject or object of emphasis should be maintained in the translation process.

In what follows, using the NIV New Testament as a base, I have taken each level of imperatival intensity and described briefly the various English forms that best communicate the sense of the Greek. As much as possible, they are discussed in descending order of intensity.[314] Under each level of intensity examples are examined according to the grammatical structure in which they are classified in order to maintain the proper subject/object emphasis.

### Obligatory Level

The best English forms for this level of intensity are the third person subjunctive without a modal auxiliary (simple subjunctive), with the modal auxiliaries “must”[315] and “shall/will,”316 and rarely the third person indicative. Second person imperatives and subjunctives can also be used; however, generally they should be restricted to the apodoses of conditional constructs.

Subject transfers in determinate nominative constructs are often translated with a diminished capacity. When John the Baptist responded to questions from some Jews about avoiding the coming judgment upon Jerusalem, he answered, “The man with two tunics should share with him who has none, and the one who has food should do the same” (Luke 3:11, NIV). The emphasis upon the focus groups (those possessing an extra tunic and those with food) is maintained, but the force is softened with the modal auxiliary “should.” Considering the subject matter and consequences, John calls for obligatory compliance. This is confirmed by his responses to two specific groups in the crowd raising the same concern. He answers by using two prescriptive second person imperatives (pra/ssete, v. 13, and ajrkeivsqe, v. 14) and two prohibitive second person subjunctives (mhde/na diasei/shte mhde\ sukofanth/shte, v. 14).[317] The intensity of John’s proclamation is communicated better by the NRSV: “Whoever has two coats must share with anyone who has none; and whoever has food must do likewise.”

The commonly used “unstressed” modal auxiliary “let” is at best ambiguous, generally connoting the idea of permission (or even recommendation), and should be reserved for the hortative level of intensity.[318] There is no necessity to employ this or any other auxiliary that has less than full imperatival intensity.[319] For example, the idiomatic expression oJ e¡cwn w∞ta ajkoue/tw is nearly always translated “He who has ears, let him hear” (Matt 11:15; Luke 14:35; Rev 2:7; etc.).[320] Although the grammatical emphasis is nearly retained in a reflexive sense,[321] an ambiguity remains and the force is mollified. Both the emphasis and force can be maintained without ambiguity: “He who has ears, must listen.”[322]

Likewise, other uses of “let” could be replaced by “must” (“They must come themselves and escort us out,” Acts 16:37),323 or a simple subjunctive (“He who boasts is to boast in the Lord,” 1 Cor 1:31; 2 Cor 10:17).324 A second person imperative is appropriate in a context where the speaker or writer’s intended audience is clearly focused (“You who are without sin, cast the first stone,” John 8:7).325

As in the previous determinate classification, subject transfers in indeterminate nominative constructs are frequently translated with “let” or “should” when simple third person subjunctives or the modal auxiliary “must” would maintain the emphasis and force better. For example, “Therefore, what God has joined together, let man not separate,” Matt 19:6.[326] The NAB has “no human being must separate.” Although the grammar is clumsy, the force is stronger.327

In some cases, however, the NIV does use the stronger third person subjunctive with “must” (Matt 5:31; Rom 13:1; Eph 5:33). In Acts 2:38 it uses the forceful second person passive imperative “be baptized” with the second person active imperative “repent” while the emphasis upon each individual in the immediate audience is maintained by the following phrase “everyone of you.”[328]

In object transfers generally the responsible party for carrying out the imperative is the listening or reading audience defined by a second person construct in the immediate context. The object of the responsible party’s actions is made the subject of the third person imperative for emphasis. Again, the NIV often mollifies it with “let” or “should”; for example, “let your ‘Yes’ be ‘Yes’” rather than the stronger “Your ‘Yes’ is to be ‘Yes’” or “Your ‘Yes’ must be ‘Yes’ (Matt 5:37).[329]

Conversely and more frequently, a second person imperative is used maintaining force, but diminishing emphasis: “Do not let sin reign in your mortal body” (Rom 6:12).330 Paul’s personification of sin is enhanced as the subject of the third person imperative, which is easily communicated with English subjunctives: “Sin must not (is not to) reign in your mortal body.”

In some cases, the NIV retains both the emphasis and force of the Greek: “But say the word, and my servant will be healed” (Luke 7:7),[331] and “Perseverance must finish its work” (Jas 1:4).[332]

In object transfers where the responsible party must be defined by contextual implication rather than a second person construct, the NIV generally retains both the force and emphasis of the Greek.[333] This is accomplished with the modal auxiliaries “must” (“Anyone who curses his father or mother must be put to death,” Matt 15:4; “must surely die,” NRSV; “shall die,” NAB)[334] and “will” (“It will be done just as you believed it would,” Matt 8:13; 9:29), simple subjunctives (“hallowed be your name, your kingdom come, your will be done,” Matt 6:9 - 10),[335] second person imperatives (“Crucify him!” Matt 27:22 - 23), and third person indicatives (“Your request is granted,” Matt 15:28, and “The elders who direct the affairs of the church are worthy of double honor...” 1 Tim 5:17).

Most (47 of 54) of the final classification of third person imperatives, conditional constructs, are, by their very nature, obligatory.336 Nevertheless, the NIV sometimes softens the force in indefinite conditions with the modal auxiliaries “let” (Mark 4:23; Gal 1:9) and “should” (1 Cor 3:18; 11:34; 1 Tim 5:16). However, in many cases it retains the force as well as the subject emphasis with the modal auxiliaries “must” (“he must not divorce her,” 1 Cor 7:11-12; Matt 16:24)337 and “shall” (“If a man will not work, he shall not eat,” 2 Thess 3:10).

In nearly every case of both specified and mixed conditions the NIV softens either the force or the emphasis with the modal auxiliaries “should” (1 Cor 7:9; 11:6; 14:28, 30, 35; 1 Tim 5:4), “let” (Matt 10:13; Gal 1:8), “can” (Acts 19:38), “may” (Matt 26:42),338 or second person imperatives (Matt 18:17; Acts 4:9 - 10). In one passage, both force and emphasis are maintained: “But if she does (i.e., divorce), she must remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband” (1 Cor 7:11).

## Hortative Level

The modal auxiliaries “ought” and “should” are generally understood to have an obligatory force:

> Ought denotes obligation, and is a stronger expression of obligation than should, but not so strong as must...should is similar to must and ought, but does not express the compulsion which must denotes, nor the moral obligation or duty of ought.[339]

There is a sense that when a speaker or writer uses these auxiliaries there is a mollification of force: “should is frequently used to express obligation modestly or politely.”[340] The speaker often speaks without authority: “Jesus’ brothers said to him, “You ought to leave here and go to Judea, so that your disciples may see the miracles you do (John 7:3; see also Acts 25:24). For these reasons, plus the fact that there is no lack of forceful English forms that may be chosen for an obligatory force, these auxiliaries should be reserved for the hortative level.

Accordingly, the strongest English form on the hortative level is a third person subjunctive with the modal auxiliary “ought,” but because it has the sense of moral obligation, it is not the best choice for the passages being considered.341 On the other hand, in passages where the thrust is exhortation the auxiliary “should” is most appropriate. The auxiliary “let,” indiscriminately used to translate the third person imperative, should be reserved for this level (see above pp. 62 - 63), but it is less forceful than “should.” Weaker than “let,” but possibilities for imperatives as permission, are third person subjunctives with the modal auxiliaries “can” or “may.”

In nearly every case, the NIV uses the forms suggested here, thus maintaining the proper force and emphasis. However, in two object transfers in second person constructs (John 14:1, 27) and in one indefinite condition (Jas 5:20), second person imperatives are also used, retaining the force but diminishing the emphasis.342 All three examples are practical exhortations.[343]

The subject transfers in Matt 24:15 - 18 (and pars.) are warnings and could be stronger than the NIV translation suggests (“Let no one on the roof of his house go down ...,”),344 even as it translates the similar context in Luke 17:31 (“no one who is on the roof of his house ... should go down”). Paul warns his readers, “Let no one deceive you with empty words” (Eph 5:6). This is an object transfer in which the subject of the imperative (the deceivers) needs emphasis, but the force of the warning should be directed at the readers.[345] A second person imperative could add this force: “Do not let any one deceive you with empty words.”

The one permissive third person imperative (1 Cor 7:15) is nearly always translated, as in the NIV, with “let” taken to mean “allow”: “But if the unbeliever leaves,
let him do so.”

### Optative Level

The best modal auxiliary to express this level of intensity (wish or desire) is “may.” There are only six passages I classified as having this force.[346] Five are in prayers (Matt 26:39; Acts 1:20a, 20b; Rom 11:9 - 10), and in each case, but one, the NIV uses “may,” retaining both the force and emphasis.347 The statement in Acts 21:14 is translated appropriately by nearly every version as a simple third person passive subjunctive, which is the strongest optative form: “The Lord’s will be done.”

There are a number of English forms available to convey the meaning and function of the Greek third person imperative. If there have been weaknesses in the major translations, they include the overuse of the auxiliaries “let” and “should” in obligatory contexts, and the failure to maintain both the proper imperatival force and the third person emphasis in the Greek form. However, in the end, the reader is responsible to examine the sense of the imperative in its context, which must ultimately engender one’s final understanding.

## Occurances of Third Person Imperative

## Classifications of Third Person Imperative

## Bibliography

### General Reference Works

- Aland, B., K. Aland, J. Karavidopoulos, C. M. Martini, and B. M. Metzger, eds. The Greek New Testament, 4th rev. ed. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, 1993.
- Aland, K., M. Black, C. M. Martini, B. M. Metzger, and A. Wikgren, eds. Novum Testamentum Graece, 26th ed. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, 1979.
- Berkowitz, L. and K. A. Squitier. Thesaurus Linguae Graecae: Canon of Greek Authors and Works, 2d ed. (CD ROM No. D, Packard Humanities Institute, Regents of the University of California, 1992). New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
- Louw, Johannes P. and Eugene A. Nida, eds. Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament Based on Semantic Domains, Vol. 1, Introduction and Domains, 2d ed. New York: United Bible Societies, 1989.
- Rahlfs, Alfred. Septuaginta. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, 1979.

### Books

- Bakker, Willem Frederik. The Greek Imperative. Amsterdam: Adolf M. Hakkert, 1966.
- Barth, Markus. Ephesians 4 - 6. Anchor Bible 34A. Garden City, New York: Doubleday and Company, Inc., 1974.
- Beekman, John and John Callow. Translating the Word of God. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics, 1988.
- Blass, F. and A. Debrunner. A Grammar of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature. 9th - 10th German ed. translated and revised by Robert W Funk. Chicago: The University Of Chicago Press, 1961.
- Bolinger, Dwight. Meaning and Form. London and New York: Longman Group Limited, 1977.
- Brooks, James A. and Carlton L. Winbery. Syntax of New Testament Greek. New York: University Press Of America, Inc., 1979; typeset ed., 1988.
- Brown, Colin, ed. The New International Dictionary of New Testament Theology. Vol. 2, G - Pre. Grand Rapids: The Zondervan Corporation, 1976. S.v. “Hear, Obey,” by Wilhelm Mundle.
- Bruce, F. F. The Acts of the Apostles. 3d rev. ed. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1990.
- Bruner, Frederick Dale. A Theology of the Holy Spirit. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1970.
- Burton, Ernest De Witt. Syntax of the Moods and Tenses in New Testament Greek. Chicago: University Of Chicago Press, 1900; reprint of 3d ed., Grand Rapids: Kregel Publications, 1976.
- Carson, D. A. Exegetical Fallacies. Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1984.
- Conybeare, F. C. and St. George Stock. A Grammar of Septuagint Greek. Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1905.
- Cotterell, Peter and Max Turner. Linguistics and Biblical Interpretation. Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity Press, 1989.
- Cranfield, C. E. B. A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans. Vol. 1. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark Ltd., 1975; reprint, 1982.
- Cranfield, C. E. B. A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans. Vol. 2. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark Ltd., 1979; reprint, 1981.
- Curme, George O. A Grammar of the English Language. Vol. 3, Syntax. Boston: D. C. Heath and Company, 1931.
- Dana, H. E. and Julius R. Mantey. A Manual Grammar of the Greek New Testament. Toronto: The Macmillan Company, 1927.
- Dunn, James D. G. Romans 9 - 16. Word Biblical Commentary, 38B. Dallas: Word, Incorporated, 1988.
- Edwards, Paul, ed. The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol. 7. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc. and The Free Press, 1967; reprint 1972. S.v. “Semantics,” by Donald Kalish.
- Findlay, G. G. St. Paul’s First Epistle to the Corinthians. The Expositor’s Greek Testament, ed. by W. Robertson Nicoll, vol. II. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1917; reprint, Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1976.
- Fitzmyer, Joseph A. The Gospel According to Luke (I - IX). Anchor Bible 28. Garden City, New York: Doubleday and Company, Inc., 1981.
- \_\_\_\_. The Gospel According to Luke (X - XXIV). Anchor Bible 28A. Garden City, New York: Doubleday and Company, Inc., 1985.
- Gentry, Kenneth L. Jr. Before Jerusalem Fell. Tyler, Texas: Institute for Christian Economics, 1989.
- Gildersleeve, Basil Lanneau. Syntax of Classical Greek, From Homer to Demosthenes. With the cooperation of Charles William Emil Miller. New York: American Book Company, 1900.
- Goetchius, Eugene Van Ness. The Language of the New Testament. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1965.
- Goldingay, John E. Daniel, Word Biblical Commentary, 30. Dallas: Word, Incorporated, 1989.
- Guelich, Robert A. The Sermon on the Mount: A Foundation for Understanding. Waco, Texas: Word Books, 1982.
- Guthrie, Donald. New Testament Introduction. Downers Grove, Illinois: Intervarsity Press, 1990.
- Harrison, R. K. Introduction to the Old Testament. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1969.
- Hirsch, Jr., E. D. Validity In Interpretation. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1967.
- Hooker, Morna. The Gospel According to Mark. Black’s New Testament Commentaries, ed. Henry Chadwick, Vol. II. Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson Publishers, Inc., 1991.
- House, Homer C. and Susan Emolyn Harman. Descriptive English Grammar. 2d ed. rev. by Susan Emolyn Harman. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1950.
- Kaiser, Walter C. Toward Old Testament Ethics. Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1983.
- Käsemann, Ernst. Commentary on Romans. Translated and edited by George W. Bromiley. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1980.
- Kittel, Gerhard, ed. Theological Dictionary of the New Testament. Vol. I, A - G. Translated by Geoffrey W. Bromiley. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1964. S.v. “ajkou/w, ajkoh/, ktl,” by Gerhard Kittel and “ajspa/zomai, ktl,” by Hans Windisch.
- LaSor, William Sanford. Handbook of New Testament Greek. Vol. 2, Grammar, Synoptic Paradigms, Basic Vocabulary. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1973.
- Lenski, R. C. H. The Interpretation of St. Paul’s Epistles to the Galatians, to the Ephesians, and to the Philippians. Minneapolis: Augsburg Publishing House, 1961.
- Lincoln, Andrew T. Ephesians. Word Biblical Commentary 42. Dallas: Word Incorporated, 1990.
- Martin, Ralph P. 2 Corinthians. Word Biblical Commentary 40. Dallas: Word Incorporated, 1986.
- Martin, William J. “1 Corinthians 11:2 - 16: An Interpretation.” In Apostolic History and the Gospel, ed. W. Ward Gasque and Ralph P. Martin, 231 - 241. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1970.
- McKay, K. L. A New Syntax of the Verb in New Testament Greek. New York: Peter Lang Publishing, Inc., 1994.
- Metzger, Bruce M. A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament. 2d ed. Stuttgart: German Bible Society, 1994.
- Moore, Marcia D. “The ‘Widows’ in 1 Tim. 5:3-16.” In Essays on Women in Earliest Christianity, Vol. I, ed. Carroll D. Osburn, 321 - 366. Joplin, Missouri: College Press Publishing Company, 1993.
- Morris, Canon Leon. The Book of Revelation: An Introduction and Commentary. 2d ed. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1987.
- Moule, C. F. D. An Idiom Book of New Testament Greek. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1953.
- Moulton, James Hope. A Grammar of New Testament Greek. Vol. 1, Prolegomena. 3d ed. Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark, 1908.
- Murray, John. Divorce. Philadelphia: The Presbyterian and Reformed Publishing Company, 1976.
- Nanos, Mark D. The Mystery of Romans. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1996.
- Newman, Barclay M. and Eugene A. Nida. A Handbook on Paul’s Letter to the Romans. New York: United Bible Societies, 1973.
- Nida, Eugene A. Toward a Science of Translating. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1964.
  ----- and Charles R. Taber. The Theory and Practice of Translation. Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill for the United Bible Societies, 1969.
- Payne, J. Barton. Encyclopedia of Biblical Prophecy. New York: Harper and Row Publishers, 1973; reprint, Grand Rapids: Baker Book House Company, 1980.
- Porter, Stanley E. Verbal Aspect in the Greek of the New Testament, with Reference to Tense and Mood. New York: Peter Lang Publishing, Inc., 1993.
- \_\_\_\_. Idioms of the Greek New Testament. 2d ed. with corrections. Sheffield, England: JSOT Press, 1994.
  ----- and D. A. Carson, eds. Biblical Greek Language and Linguistics. Sheffield, England: JSOT Press, 1993.
- Robertson, A. T. A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical Research. Nashville: Broadman Press, 1934.
- \_\_\_\_. Word Pictures in the New Testament. Vol. III, The Acts of the Apostles. Nashville: Broadman Press, 1930.
- \_\_\_\_. Word Pictures in the New Testament. Vol. IV, The Epistles of Paul. Nashville: Broadman Press, 1931.
- Robinson, John A. T. Redating the New Testament. Philadelphia: The Westminster Press, 1976.
- Smyth, Herbert Weir. Greek Grammar. Rev. by Gordon M. Messing. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1984.
- Turner, Nigel. A Grammar of New Testament Greek. Vol. 3, Syntax. Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark, 1963.
- \_\_\_\_. Grammatical Insights into the New Testament. Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark, 1965.
- Voelz, James W. “The Language of the New Testament.” In Aufstieg und Niedergang der Römischen Welt. II.25.2, ed. Wolfgang Haase, 893 - 977. Berlin: Walter D. Gruyter, 1984.
- Winer, George Benedict. A Grammar of the Idiom of the New Testament. 7th ed. by Gottlieb Lu¡nemann. Andober: Warren F. Draper, 1893.
- Wright, N. T. Jesus and the Victory of God. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1996.
- Young, Richard A. Intermediate New Testament Greek: A Linguistic and Exegetical Approach. Nashville: Broadman And Holman Publishers, 1994.

### Journals

- Boyer, James L. “First Class Conditions: What Do They Mean?” Grace Theological Journal 2 (1981): 75 - 116.
- \_\_\_\_. “Third (and Fourth) Class Conditions.” Grace Theological Journal 3/2 (1982): 163 - 175.
- \_\_\_\_. “Other Conditional Elements in New Testament Greek.” Grace Theological Journal 4/2 (1983): 173 - 188.
- \_\_\_\_. “A Classification of Imperatives: A Statistical Study.” Grace Theological Journal 8/1 (1987): 35 - 54.
- \_\_\_\_. “Supplemental Manual of Information: Imperative Verbs.” Winona Lake, Indiana: Grace Theological Seminary, 1987. Photocopied.
- \_\_\_\_. “The Classification of Optatives: A Statistical Study.” Grace Theological Journal 9/1 (1988): 129 - 140.
- Cadoux, C. J. “The Imperatival Use of i¢na in the New Testament.” Journal of Theological Studies 42 (1941): 165 - 173.
- Davis, J. C. “Another Look at the Relationship Between Baptism and Forgiveness of Sins in Acts 2:38.” Restoration Quarterly 24 (1981): 80 - 88.
- Deer, Donald S. “More About the Imperatival Hina.” Bible Translator 24 (July 1973): 328 - 329.
- \_\_\_\_. “Still More About the Imperatival i¢na.” Bible Translator 30 (1979): 148.
- Donovan, J. “Greek Jussives.” Classical Review 9 (April 1895): 145 - 149.
- \_\_\_\_. “German Opinion on Greek Jussives.” Classical Review 9 (July 1895): 289 - 293, 342-346, 444 - 447.
- Du Plooy, G. P. V. “Aspect and Biblical Exegesis.” Neotestamentica 25.1 (1991): 157 - 170.
- Elliott, Ray. “Functions of the Third Person Imperative Verb in the Greek New Testament.” Notes On Translation 69 (June 1978): 30 - 31.
- Fernando, Andrew P. “Translation of Questions and Prohibitions in Greek.” Bible Translator 27 (January 1976): 138 - 140.
- Fränkel, Hermann. “Three Talks on Grammar.” California Studies in Antiquity 7 (1974): 113 - 153.
- George, A. R. “The Imperatival Use of i¢na in the New Testament.” Journal of Theological Studies 45 (1944): 56 - 60.
- Glaze, Judy. “The Septuagintal Use of the Third Person Imperative.” M. A. thesis, Harding Graduate School Of Religion, 1979.
- Greenlee, J. Harold. “The Importance of Syntax for the Proper Understanding of the Sacred Text of the New Testament.” Evangelical Quarterly 44 (1972): 131 - 146
- Grumm, Meinert H. “The Gospel Call: Imperatives in Romans.” Expository Times 93 (May 1982): 239 - 242.
- Harry, J. E. “The Perfect subjunctive, Optative, and Imperative in Greek.” Classical Review 19 (1905): 347 - 354.
- Headlam, W. “Some Passages of Aeschylus and Others.” Classical Review 17 (1903): 240 -249, 286 - 295.
- \_\_\_\_. “Greek Prohibitions.” Classical Review 19 (1905): 30 - 36.
- Heidt, William. “Translating New Testament Imperatives.” Catholic Biblical Quarterly 13 (1951): 253 - 256.
- Hicks, Clinton. “The Abused Present Indicative and Churches of Christ.” Unpublished graduateresearch paper, Harding School of Religion, 1980.
- Hoerber, Robert G. “Implications of the Imperative in the Sermon on the Mount.” Concordia Journal 7.3 (May 1981): 100 - 103.
- Humbert, J. “Verbal Aspect: Has it Evolved from Ancient to Modern Greek?” The Link 1 (1938): 21 - 28.
- Humphreys, M. W. “On Negative Commands in Greek.” Transactions Of The American Philological Association 7 (1876): 46 - 49.
- Jackson, Henry. “Prohibitions in Greek.” Classical Review 18 (1904): 262 - 263.
- Louw, J. P. “On Greek Prohibitions.” Acta Classica 2 (1959): 43 - 57.
- Matthewson, Dave. “Verbal Aspect in Imperatival Constructions in Pauline Ethical Injunctions.” Filolgia Neotestamentaria 9 (May 1996): 21 - 35.
- McIntyre, Luther B. “Baptism and Forgiveness in Acts 2:38.” Bibliotheca Sacra 153 (JanuaryMarch 1996): 53 - 60.
- McKay, K. L. “Syntax in Exegesis.” Tyndale Bulletin 23 (1972): 39 - 57.
- \_\_\_\_. “On the Perfect and Other Aspects in New Testament Greek.” Novum Testamentum 23/4 (1981): 289 - 329.
- \_\_\_\_. “Aspect in Imperatival Constructions in New Testament Greek.” Novum Testamentum 27/3 (1985): 201 - 226.
- \_\_\_\_. “Aspects of the Imperative in Ancient Greek.” Antichthon 20 (1986): 41 - 58.
- \_\_\_\_. “Time and Aspect in New Testament Greek.” Novum Testamentum 34/3 (1992): 209 - 228.
- Meecham, H. G. “The Imperatival Use of i¢na in the New Testament.” Journal of Theological Studies 43 (1942): 179 - 180.
- Miller, C. W. E. “The Limitation of the Imperative in the Attic Orators.” American Journal Of Philology 13 (1892): 399 - 436.
- Morrice, William G. “The Imperatival i¢na.” Bible Translator 23 (July 1972): 326 - 330.
- \_\_\_\_. “Translating the Greek Imperative.” Bible Translator 24 (January 1973): 129 - 134.
- Mozley, F. W. “Notes on the Biblical Use of the Present and Aorist Imperative.” Journal Of Theological Studies 4 (1903): 279 - 281.
- Naylor, H. Darnley. “Prohibitions in Greek.” Classical Review 19 (1905): 26 - 30.
- \_\_\_\_. “More Prohibitions in Greek.” Classical Review 20 (1906): 348.
- Osburn, Carroll D. “The Third Person Imperative in Acts 2:38.” Restoration Quarterly 26 (1983): 81 - 84.
- Porter, Stanley E. “i¡ste ginw/skonteß in Ephesians 5,5: Does Chiasm Solve a Problem?” Zeitschrift für die Neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 81 (1990): 270 - 276.
- \_\_\_\_. “Keeping up with Recent Studies: 17. Greek Language and Linguistics.” Expository Times 103 (1992): 202 - 208.
- Post, L. A. “Dramatic Uses of the Greek Imperative.” American Journal Of Philology 59 (1938): 31 - 59.
- Roberts, J. W. “Baptism for Remission of Sins—A Critique.” Restoration Quarterly 1 (1957): 226 - 234.
- Ruipérez, Martín S. “The Neutralization of Morphological Oppositions as Illustrated by the Neutral Aspect of the Present Indicative in Classical Greek.” Word 9 (1953): 241 - 252.
- Scott, John A. “Prohibitives with PROS and the Genitive.” Classical Philology 2 (1907): 324 - 330.
- Seaton, R. C. “Prohibitions in Greek.” Classical Review 20 (1906): 438.
- Smith, Charles R. “Errant Aorist Interpreters.” Grace Theological Journal 2 (1981): 205 - 226.
- Snyder, Scot. “Participles and Imperatives in 1 Peter: A Re-examination in the Light of Recent
- Scholarly Trends.” Filología Neotestamentaria 8 (November, 1995): 187 - 198.
- Stagg, Frank. “The Abused Aorist.” Journal Of Biblical Literature 92 (1972): 222 - 231.
- Stephens, Laurence. “The Origins of a Homeric Peculiarity: MH Plus Aorist Imperative.” Transactions Of The American Philological Association 113 (1983): 69 - 78.
- Strunk, Klaus. Review of The Greek Imperative, by Willem Frederik Bakker. In Gnomon 42 (1970): 623 - 625.
- Szemere/nyi, Oswald. “Unorthodox Views of Tense and Aspect.” Archivum Linguisticum 17 (1969): 161 - 171.
- Tanton, Lanny Thomas. “The Gospel and Water Baptism: A Study of Acts 2:38.” Journal of the Grace Evangelical Society 3 (Spring 1990): 27 - 52.
- Thorley, John. “Subjunctive Aktionsart in New Testament Greek: A Reassessment.” Novum Testamentum 30.3 (1988): 193 - 211.
- \_\_\_\_. “Aktionsart in New Testament Greek: Infinitive and Imperative.” Novum Testamentum 31.4 (1989): 290 - 315.
- Voelz, James W. “The Use of the Present and Aorist Imperatives and Prohibitions in the New Testament.” Ph. D. diss., University Of Cambridge, 1977.
- Zilliacus, Henrik. “Note on the Periphrases of the Imperatives in Classical Greek.” Eranos 44 (1946): 266 - 279.

[^1]: John Beekman and John Callow, Translating the Word of God (Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics, 1988): 19 - 20.
[^2]: Richard A. Young, Intermediate New Testament Greek: A Linguistic and Exegetical Approach (Nashville: Broadman and Holman Publishers, 1994): 3. This term is also applied to the lack of correspondence between the form and function of the source language and the receptor language. Ray Elliott, “Functions of the Third Person Imperative in the Greek New Testament,” Notes on Translation 69 (June 1978): 30
[^3]: For example, the grammatical construction th\n dwrea\n touv aJgi/ou pneu/matoß (Acts 2:38) may be understood either appositionally or subjectively. This form removed from its context does not necessarily correspond to either meaning. Also, the lexical form pneu/ma taken alone may mean either “spirit” or “wind” (John 3:5 - 6, 8; Heb 1:7).
[^4]: The debate over the possibility of recovering authorial intent has no bearing on this discussion. Whatever the author’s intent, it necessarily influenced his or her choice of form. For this debate see Peter Cotterell and Max Turner, Linguistics and Biblical Interpretation (Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity Press, 1989): 53 - 71; and especially E. D. Hirsch, Jr., Validity In Interpretation (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1967).
[^5]: Stanley E. Porter argues for this distinction with particular reference to the Greek verbal network, which helps explain the disparity of temporal functions realized from a single verb form (Verbal Aspect in the Greek of the New Testament, with Reference to Tense and Mood [New York: Peter Lang, 1993]: 97). See my discussion of these categories, pp. 17 - 19.
